City Council Committee of the Whole 2024-10-15
Agenda
https://medfordma.portal.civicclerk.com/event/323/overview
Recording:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kP4iRYobyr0
Captions auto-generated by youtube and edited for clarity. Edits remove filler words and add headings to make it easier to skim.


City Employees:


Isaac B. “Zac” Bears
City Council President
781-391-5623
ibears@medford-ma.gov
	Kit Collins
City Council Vice President
781-816-7676
kcollins@medford-ma.gov


	Anna Callahan
City Councilor 
acallahan@medford-ma.gov


	Emily Lazzaro
City Councilor 
elazzaro@medford-ma.gov


	Matt Leming
City Councilor 
mleming@medford-ma.gov


	George A. Scarpelli
City Councilor 
781-858-0240
scarpg@comcast.net
	Justin Tseng
City Councilor
781-866-2572
tseng@medford-ma.gov


	

	Adam L. Hurtubise
City Clerk
ahurtubise@medford-ma.gov
(781) 393-2425
	Ted Costigan
Chief Assessor
(781) 393-2435
tcostigan@medford-ma.gov 
	

	

	





Table of Contents


Role call:        2
24-475 – Hold Q&A on 2.5 overrides        2
Resolution https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=128        3
Amendments - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=145        3
Rules - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=166        3
Larry Lepore -  https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=218        3
City Assessor - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=247        4
Clarification about rules https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=270        4
Role call:
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=112
[Bears] {truncated} 2024. Mr. Clerk, please call the role.
[City Clerk Hurtubise] Councilor Callahan?
[Callahan] Present.
[Hurtubise] Vice president Collins?
[Collins] Present.
[Hurtubise] Councilor Lazzaro?
[Lazzaro] Present
[Hurtubise]  Councilor Leming?
[Leming] Present
[Hurtubise]  Councilor Scarpelli?
[Scarpelli] Present
[Hurtubise]  Councilor Tseng?
[Tseng] Present
[Hurtubise]  President Bears?
[Bears] Present
24-475 – Hold Q&A on 2.5 overrides
Resolution https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=128
[Bears] 24-475, offered by councilor Scarpelli. Be it resolved that the Medford City council hold a question and answer session to discuss the definitions and terminology regarding the proposed proposition two and a half overrides and the proposed debt exclusion measure. 
To that resolution, the following amendments were added:
Amendments - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=145
Councilor Scarpelli asked that the administration and Council on Aging do outreach to seniors of this meeting.
Councilor Callahan requested outreach to parents of school age children, not just teachers, and specifically requested outreach through the PTOs.
Councilor Tseng requested general outreach and specifically requested that the community liaisons translate into other languages the information that is on the city website about the overrides and the debt exclusion.
Rules - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=166
To ensure the council is able to answer questions in a timely manner and that decorum is maintained. The council president, myself, will be enforcing and the following rules:
1.  Members of the public will have one minute to ask one question.
2. Members of the public will not be able to ask a second question until all who seek to ask a question have had the chance to ask their first question.
3. The president will verbally request that residents not ask duplicative or largely similar questions to questions that have already been answered, and may move to the next question if a duplicative or similar question is asked
4. Each counselor will have up to two minutes to answer per question
5. The president will verbally request the counselors not answer if a duplicative or largely similar answer has been given by another counselor and may move to the next question if a duplicative or similar answer is given
6. After members of the public have had the chance to ask their first question, the president will open the floor to either a second question or a short public comment by members of the public in attendance
Larry Lepore -  https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=218
And before we start, I just want to say that the council itself is in mourning today. Last night, we lost our city messenger Larry Lepore who has served us for many years. We will be having some condolence remarks, made at our regular meeting that will begin after our committee of the whole meeting, so I hope that folks will stick around -- if you knew Larry or otherwise -- to say a kind word or story that you may have shared with him, during his many years serving the city behind this rail.
City Assessor - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=247
With that, I do want to invite our City Assessor Ted Costigan. The council had requested some answers and updates from him, and I know that he's here to share some information that his office has been working on. So with that, I will go to our assessor, Ted Costigan.
[Scarpelli] Before we go on, can I just address my original resolution?
[Bears] Sure. And then we’ll go to Ted.
Clarification about rules https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=270
[Scarpelli] Because I know there are questions. There are questions. I know that there were some questions about Council rules. About limitations when it comes to meetings, minutes and how long we can speak. And if there are follow-up questions, and if there's one question, I believe Councilor Bears explained the process that we're using, and as council president, I think he wants to move this meeting along, but I just there were some senior citizens that mentioned if there's some confusion, I hope we have a little leeway when it comes to maybe asking the same question twice because of maybe not understanding it. So I hope we would do that. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=308
The other question that Council Bears did just speak about is that we all asked for information to be sent out to the community. The mayor's response, I believe the chief of staff did respond, that legally, the city couldn't inform or… I'll just read, if I can, just so people understand, because it's a little confusing to people:
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=337
Sending this information request. We sent this email to legal today to guide us on what we should avoid doing, before we can assist given the OCPF [Office of Campaign and Political Finance] guidelines. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=350
One specific question in mind is whether we can intentionally direct notification/advertisement to [a] subset of residents. So the following is up on my email below: “Per counsel, we can't send unsolicited information to all voters or a portion of Voters of the city, whether by mail or by email.”
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=373
We got that, that response was today, correct, Council Bears? It was 10 a.m. today. If we knew that, we needed to change wording. I think sending out an all call. That we were having a meeting that would uh it's open to the public that just read the resolution I think that that wouldn't have been an issue. So I just wanted to share that with you. So thank you.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=394
[Bears] Sure and “per counsel,” you mean “legal counsel”. I don't know that I was on that email.
[Scarpelli] You are.
[Bears] Was I on that?
[Scarpelli] I believe it was. It was… Adam, did you forward this to everybody?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=406
[Hurtubise] You know what? I don't think I did, I apologize. I don't think I did forward that to everybody. I thought it went to everybody. I think it only went to the three who had amendments. I don't think I did forward that, okay? My apologies. 
[Scarpelli] Okay, thank you.
[Bears] She means legal counsel, right?
[Hurtubise] Yeah, legal counsel.
[Bears] All right, good. I didn't want her to think… not this Council, legal counsel. Alright, thank you.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=426
With that I'll go to our City Assessor. And let me know when you want me to put slides up. 
[struggling with mic]
[Bears] The new mics are coming on Thursday. Shane's going to come out and he's going to fix it. I hear the chair moving. Thanks Shane!
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=485
[Bears]. Try now.
[City Assessor Ted Costigan] Testing. 
[Bears] There we go. Great thank you Shane.
City Assessor - https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=490
[Costigan] Yeah my condolences to the council for our loss. That’s a pretty big guy, so sorry for that. 
Yeah, but if we could go to the slides. Just a point of information, the Department of Revenue received our valuations for fiscal year 25. They approved it actually this morning, so I'm able to share with you our evaluation evaluation changes for fiscal year 25. 
As a reminder to everyone, on a yearly basis, the Department of Revenue in the State mandates that we, the assessing office, update valuations to full and fair cash value, again on that fiscal year basis. We share those valuations in January, but we worked really hard in the office this year to get them done, and as of this morning they were approved so I'm just sharing this information because it will apply to the override and those override options. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=544
So residential valuations went up approximately 4% this year and the commercial industrial personal property, which is our you know commercial based went up about 3% in value this year. Our new growth, which is, when you think of like, new single family homes, new condo conversions, any exempt property that goes to taxable, that's a $2.5 million in New Growth, which adds to our Levy. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=568
And then I just wanted to point out that, absent any override vote, the average tax bill would go up approximately $175, on our median single family this year. That's sort of the effects of Prop 2.5. 
Next page. So we obviously have our override votes. Just as a reminder to people, question six, whether it passes or not will not have an effect on fiscal year 25 tax bills. That's because the Debt Service payment would have to be paid in fiscal year 25 which would not be possible given the time it takes to issue the debt. And obviously, the six-month period before the first debt payment would be due so we're looking at questions seven and eight tonight which would have an effect were they to pass on the fiscal year 25 tax bills.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=619
Next slide. I don't want to bore people to death so I just took one example, which is our median single family tax bill. I know the numbers might be a little small, but again, the way we arrive at your tax bill, is multiplying your valuation by the tax rate. And our tax rate is, in a lot of ways, determined by how much we can levy on taxpayers. So the levy last year was about $139.9m. We have prop 2.5, which pushed up the levy by 3.5 million. The new growth which is 2.5, which gives us our fiscal year 25 Levy at $146 million. That's the amount of money that the city can collect in real estate personal property taxation from its taxpayers. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=672
Our estimated tax rate, given all this, and we do have a split rate between the commercial and the residential – we'll focus on the residential, is $8.37. On the median single family home, that would mean a tax bill of $6,519 for the year. Again, that's a year-on-year difference from last year of $195. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=692
Now, the next two columns contemplate the passage of question seven and eight respectively. As you can see, the year-on-year differences, and then I'll just move on to the last column. If they were both passed, instead of a median single family home in Medford having $195 a year- on-year increase the increase would be $529, giving us a net effect, if both questions were passed, of approximately $334 to the median single family in Medford.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=726
I did run the calculations for the median condo which would be a year on-year change of $345, and the two families would be $873. That's, again, the median. What I will pledge to do, and I'm working with the mayor's communications office to get this done on our website. Now that – as of this morning – I have the approval from the Department of Revenue, I will publish all our addresses and values of residential properties on our website with these contemplated tax rates which could change slightly – and I'll get to that in the next slide – so that every resident in Medford that would like to can go on to our website, as they can normally – you could go right now and find your FY24 value – but they'll, in advance, get their fiscal year 25 value and the contemplated tax bill that would be associated with that value.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=13m2s
So just go real quick to the next slide. Just to caveat that, those tax rates are dependent on the council's tax rate hearing. They are dependent on the Department of Revenue approving our tax rate recap, and there is a rounding issue that comes in because we split the rate, so I can't go all the way past the levy so occasionally the tax rate will be off by a penny that way. So that's to say we're done with evaluation. We want to be as transparent as possible as people are starting early voting on this issue – I believe this weekend. So we will commit this week to, as long as the mayor's office communications team can help me do it, getting all the values and the impact of these overrides on our website. Any questions from the council?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=13m52s
[Bears] Yeah sure, and just thanks Ted. I want to appreciate your hard work getting this done in October. It usually gets done in January so it's appreciated. 
[Costigan] Yep 
[Bears] Counselor Scarpelli?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=14m3s
[Scarpelli] So I know that the word transparency gets thrown around Ted and I hate for you to get dragged into this but, you weren't part of any Financial task force for the override, correct?
[Costigan] No I was not.
[Scarpelli] Thank you. Normally, when communities put this into place, I'm told from different communities different assessors finance directors, that they usually line this up prior to any budget meetings so we can help our most vulnerable people in our community understand what impact it would make, so having this calculation that you're doing for us and thank you so much for doing it, because I know there were so many questions with the calculations that have been public on the side that you had nothing to do with. I know it came out of a State website, but it didn't truly calculate the newer assessment. So that's correct, right?
[Costigan] yep
[Scarpelli] Right, so when you when we look at this and now we're doing it on the 11th Hour… the question was normally, in your experience, other professionals in your field, this is done usually during budget season so we can prepare our residents that if there was an increase of $373 medium price, they're prepared. I know it sounds minimal to some people because “it's only” that's all we keep hearing, “it's only” but is it odd that we're doing this so late?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=15m33s
[Costigan] Councilor, I think you described the typical circumstance, where the vote, as we look at the votes online, are done in April or May, prior to…
[Scarpelli] Thank you. 
[Costigan] yep
[Scarpelli] appreciate that
[Bears] Any other questions? Counselor Collins.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=15m55s
[Collins] Thank you president Bears. Thank you so much for being with us here tonight and for all the leg work that you've been doing to get the FY25 estimated valuations online, like months earlier than you otherwise would. Really appreciate that, and I appreciate that it helps folks get a clearer picture of what, precisely, their bills might look like in the future, based on how the votes go in various directions. So just to make sure that I understand, the information that's available and it would be – is it on the assessor Department page, or the finance department page on the city website?
[Costigan] Yeah, so I just got the valuations done today. I just prepared the PowerPoint. I'm gonna have to work with the mayoral Communications office to get it onto our assessing page.
[Collins] Great, so…
[Costigan] We will also have… anyone who doesn't… they can call the assessing office and we can look it up very quickly for them. So they want to call in or if they want to access our website either way.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=16m50s
[Collins] Great, so up until today people can call your office or look on the Assessor's Department web page and find …
[Costigan] The webpage is going to be dependent on like, I'm going to try to get it up this week, but like it's just however fast we can do it so probably… let's say by Friday.
[Collins] Sure, but we have the FY24 based calculations, and now you're expediting getting the FY25 based valuations so that people can have even more clarity?
[Costigan] Available, yep
[Collins] Great, well thank you so much for updating that ahead of schedule, appreciate it.
[Costigan] Yep, absolutely.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=17m20s
[Bears] Thanks Ted, just two more questions. One, given your estimates, if neither of the overrides pass, based on your estimates, the tax rate would once again be going down?
[Costigan] That's correct. 
[Bears] Okay, and before today when you had the approved FY25 values, would it have been possible for anyone to provide an update using anything other than the FY24 values, or an estimate?
[Costigan] Uh… 
[Bears] Anyone from the public, not from your office.
[Costigan] Yeah, I mean you know it's possible they might have gotten close, but it's kind of hard to drill down and get it accurately presented, so yeah, I would say no.
[Bears] Thank you. All right, any further questions for members of the Council? 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=17m59s
Counselor Tseng?
[Tseng] Thank you. I understand one of the council's main priorities going in before, knowing that this might be an option in the coming years, was to maximize the senior circuit breaker for the tax deferrals and to push for the senior workoff program to get more of that done. It's my understanding that folks can find out more about the senior tax deferral from the assessor's office, is that correct?
[Costigan] Yes, so there's, as you mentioned, this our senior workoff program is staffed – I believe over at least 20 senior workoff participants this year across the city the senior deferral applications are available as well as the personal exemptions for low-income seniors. So it's kind of two different programs. They have both asset and income limits.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=18m53s
[Bears] Councilor Scarpelli? 
[Scarpelli] Thank you. Just a couple more questions. I know that you mentioned that this doesn't have any impact on question six, correct?
[Costigan] Not in fiscal year 25.
[Scarpelli] Because it's not enough time to put everything in, correct? We don't know the actual numbers, correct? 
[Costigan] Yeah, I haven't I haven't calculated that. Obviously, interest rates could change drastically.
[Scarpelli] Okay, but we still don't know how much for question six. It's open-ended, as it said in the question, there's nothing there. 
[Costigan] I can't really tell you what the Market's gonna do, right? On the bond market.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=19m28s
[Scarpelli] Alright. And I realize the exemptions are great, but I know that there are options when you do this ahead of time. Is to really prepare your your seniors. I know the exemptions sound good but when you read them, and you talk to actual people, there are a lot of senior citizens that really don't fit in that category. So there are no other options. So I know it's the buzzword, it’s easy to say we do have exemptions, but when you put it apples to apples, and you sit with the senior citizen, and you go through their situation… I'm sure you know Mrs Jones bought her house with her husband 55 years ago for 50,000. Now the house is appraised at a million dollars. It really doesn't help what we're offering, so it's a funny number, and there could be something done more, if we had time, for an exemption. That's all I'm saying. I know that if we had time, this is something we could petition to see if we can really truly support our senior citizens. I think that must be said. And I think the last piece to this, I think that when I look at this and because one question I have Ted is that a lot of people have asked not just seniors that this is like a one-time tax. This isn't, so when you see that 4% above your 2.5% increase, that's going to be compounded year after year after year. This isn't something that's going to go away like the debt exclusion, correct?
[Costigan] Correct, the levy is set at the new limit and the 2.5 is on that new Levy.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=20m57s
[Scarpelli] Right, so that that'll grow forever. So and I think the other piece that people have to understand too. And it's a tough office. So when you hear the misconceptions, I just need your input to educate our residents and understanding that, again I believe the Mayor said her house is only $13, some others here said their house is $40 a month or whatever, we can handle that. That might be the first year, but again, we were told I think someone from your office emailed us and said that we will be reassessing again in 2025 for 2026 using the data for 2023, correct?
[Costigan] So the 25 values used calendar year 23 sales, that's correct. So, next year 26 using Cal year 24 sales.
[Bears] That happens every year, correct?
[Costigan] That's every year, right.
[Scarpelli] Good – so thank you for helping with that – so it increases, so again when this tax goes in, it's now assessed again, the homes will be assessed again .
[Costigan] Yeah, so I can't predict what the final 24 numbers are going to be, but like, it could go up, it could go down. Depends on the market right?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=22m3s
[Scarpelli] But we're seeing that most assessments… because I could tell you, I'm dealing with my own family members that are looking at a $400 increase per month for his new assessment. So it's real. So I think that what people also have to understand is that it's not just the home tax you've seen, their car’s uh…
[Costigan] Motor vehicle excise
[Scarpelli] vehicle excise tax is going to go up. You're going to see the CPA tax… because your homes are going to be assessed higher now, right? So now the CPA tax will also be taxed higher. You're going to see that a little bit higher, correct? 
[Bears] Okay.
[Costigan] Yeah, that's generally correct.
[Scarpelli] Generally.
[Bears] The CPA was included in the calculations presented.
[Scarpelli] Okay, so thank you. So what you're seeing is it's not just an override tax. It's an override tax that's compounded year after year. It's a tax that increases the CPA as well, it's the excise tax that increases as well. It's so much more than just 13, that's my point I'm trying to say. 
[Costigan] Yeah 
[Scarpelli] I know it's easy to look at a look at a site that wasn't put forth by your office because we know that although it's correct the numbers that my colleagues did put out there on a page it does give the numbers that are true and factual, but that didn't include the assessments that residents had. And I'll use my brother example, because his house is appraised at – in the calculations – at $800,000. His house is now appraised at $1.2m. So that's why we're seeing that. And that's not odd, this is family-owned homes that that we passed on to generation generation, just like most people in this in this room. But thank you, I know I'm monopolizing the time because I think it's important, because these are the questions the people that are sitting in this in this room right now and their friends have contacted me and said, ‘we're very confused, Mr Scarpelli,’ because it even something simple as ‘Mr Scarpelli, why are we fighting for $7.5 million for a new high school?’ and I'm like, ‘no no this has nothing to do with the new high school, that's down the line’ and people understanding that, well this is a fight between schools and kids and senior citizens. That's not true at all. We just want to make sure all the information's out so every resident understands the impact. And we could talk about solutions as we go, because there are solutions, solutions back in April. But thank you.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=24m29s
[Bears] Thanks Ted. Really appreciate the hard work of your office. Just want to note: certainly this Council, and you’ve shared some recently, has taken several votes to maximize the exemptions allowed by state law. If you see anything more that we could do on that front… 
I believe in 2022, we voted to tie it to the law so that we wouldn't have to constantly be updating it as the state did…. If you see anything, please let us know. Certainly our intent is to be maximizing everything, and I believe we have.
[Costigan] Yeah, just the hero act that just was passed allows us to tie the veteran personal exemption to cost of living. So that just passed. So it would be a new action by council. 
[Bears] Yep, awesome. We will do that, thank you. 
[Costigan] Okay 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=25m11s
[Bears] Okay, all right, I'm gonna read off the rules of more time
we're going to move to question and answer. Alright, so we're going to follow the following rules for this part of the meeting:
1. members of the public will have 1 minute to ask one question 
2. members of the public will not be able to ask a second question until everyone has had a chance to ask their first
3. I'm going to verbally request that we not ask duplicative or largely similar questions and may move on to the next question if a duplicative or similar question is asked 
4. counselors will have up to two minutes per counselor to answer each question. 
5. I'm requesting the counselors not provide duplicative or largely similar answers to answers that have been already provided by other counselors and may move on to the next counselor for an answer if that happens.
6. And after members of the public have had the chance to ask their first question we'll open the floor to a second question or a short public comment 
And I'm going to be alternating between the chamber and zoom. So we will start at the podium.
Mr. Casanetti, you'll have one minute to ask a question and then we'll go to zoom after answers from counselors.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=26m19s
[Castanetti on the podium] Thank you counselor Bears. Andrew Castanetti, Cushing Street, East Medford Massachusetts.  
I'm very very devastated that we lost Larry Lepore. A wonderful man. He’s a good friend. 
[Scarpelli] Is the microphone on? Andrew, turn the mic down. Yeah there you go.
[Castanetti] I'm sorry we lost Larry Lepore. Two minutes? Thank you. I hope you all had a good Columbus day yesterday, because he is the greatest World Naval Explorer in history. He said the world is round, not flat. He had more courage than all of us combined. He is also a hero to me and others. Also hope you had a good indigenous people's day. I also hope the same for the Jews in the mideast because they've been there more than 2,000 years.
Now let's talk prop 2.5 overrides.
[Bears] 30 seconds
[Castanetti] As I told you all before, Medford never had a prop 2.5 override. We're not Winchester. We are all Medford here, a working class town city. Our problem is fiscal management, and lack of building maintenance period, full stop. My ask is for you honorable City councilors to stop this real estate tax assault on we the homeowners. Leave the people alone. Stop the bleeding. We're already having trouble with all this Biden inflation.
[Bears] Andy thank you, that's a minute. Does anyone…
[Castanetti] I only have one sentence.
[Bears] Go ahead, say the sentence.
[Castanetti] Is the minute up?
[Bears] You can say the sentence, Andy.
[Castanetti] Is the minute up?
[Bears] Yes sir, it is up.
[Castanetti] Yeah, all right, my motto is this: no further taxation… [inaudible from the crowd]... he's allowing me to speak, you want to interrupt me? Want to interrupt me? 
[Bears] Let's just hold on here guys. Like, I can't believe we're doing this on the first question.
[Castanetti] This is crazy, stop it. My motto is this: no more further taxation without proper representation. The end. Andrew said that dot com. Thank you for your time.
[Bears] Thank you, Andy. Does anyone have a response?  Anyone want to answer the question? Counselor Lemming, you have two minutes.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=28m33s
[Lemming] Well, I'm going to try to respond to one thing there. I didn't hear a specific question, but you did say that Medford's not like the not like our surrounding towns.
[Castanetti] I said Winchester, sir.
[Lemming] Yeah, we're not like Winchester. 90% of cities in the state of Massachusetts have had an override. Medford has one of the lowest operating budgets per capita of any midsized city in the state of Massachusetts, and that is in large part because we are one of the 10% of cities that has never had an override. So you're right we are not like our neighbors that have had overrides, and we have less money for it.
[Bears] Thank you. We'll move on to the next question unless anyone else has an answer? Thank you, Andy. We'll go to Michelle B on Zoom. Name and address for the record please, and you'll have one minute to ask your question 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=29m32s
[Berkson on zoom] Hi my name is Michelle Berkson, I live at 23 Diane Road in Medford. I thank you everyone for your work with this important progress. My question is, can you please speak to the ramifications of what will happen if questions seven and eight do not pass? Specifically, to the school budget, and how that will affect our students' learning environment? I just want to remind everyone listening that teacher working conditions are student learning conditions and those two things cannot be separated. As a public school teacher in another town, I can speak to that being very true. So I would love to hear, or not love to hear, but I want to hear what might happen if these don't pass, so we can highlight the importance of them passing. Thank you.
[Bears] Thank you. I'll go to vice president Collins, then counselor Tseng. 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=30m23s
[Collins] Thank you president Bears. Thank you for the question. I want to add a disclaimer that I – obviously sitting behind this rail, on this date – I'm not a school committee member, I don't have that level of granular knowledge of the school department and the school department makes its own budget. City council does not. That being said, I have discussed this matter extensively with people in the community, with people involved in the schools, with school committee members. I understand that you know what we stand to lose if these questions do not pass, includes some of the stuff that people involved in the schools may remember from when we had to cut the school's budget during the pandemic. And that includes eliminating positions including teachers, nurses, behavioral specialists, literary coaches. We lose the opportunity to add programming within the schools that supplement the curriculum that is State-mandated. So you know some programming that is really beloved by students and their families such as arts and musical curricula. We lose the opportunity to augment the student experience with those types of classes. We lose the opportunity to augment the student experience with more people and supportive roles, such as therapists, nurses, people outside of the classroom who are nevertheless there to make sure that students can thrive in our schools and achieve the best learning that they can.
[Bears] You have 30 seconds.
[Collins] Thank you. These two questions combined also limit our ability to offer competitive and living wages to the many many people who work in our schools and offer students the experience that they really deserve. We know that we need to be offering living wages to our teachers and paras and all School staff because it's the right thing to do. We also know that we need to be able to do that in order to keep these people in our school system so that our students are served in the way that they deserve. This will also have an impact on Building Maintenance…
[Bears] Thank you counselor Collins. Sorry. Counselor Tseng?
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=32m33s
[Tseng] Thank you. Counselor Collins, I think, touched on a list of positions that subject to school committee talks, might be at stake: literacy specialist, School nurses, guidance, Mental Health Specialists, increase class sizes. You know, it's not fear mongering when a lot of this stuff is already happening in our school districts. We've already had to make a lot of these cuts. We've already found it hard to retain a long-term teachers. We've also we also need to take a step back and look at this big picture- wise. We know when we invest in our schools, your investment in your value of your property goes up as well. That your Public Safety around you: crime goes down and Public Safety goes up. And so we, I think, there are long bigger picture benefits everyone, even if you don't have kids in the schools. 
Touching on the roads real quick because that's also a part of question seven. I think we need to look at the opportunity we lose. Now the basic role of government of local government is to fix your potholes and to send your kids to school, and if we're not if we can't do either of those, then we're not doing our jobs. But we are asking the voters to give us the tools to do our jobs. And something about question seven with the roads and sidewalks is that it would give us a crew that would work full-time on fixing our potholes and sidewalks in the city. That's something that we don't have right now because our resources are too constrained. And that's something that I believe, if passed, will give our residents a real benefit – a real benefit that you can see and live in our city. 
[Bears] Thank you counselor Tseng. Counselor Scarpelli? 
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=34m4s
[Scarpelli] Thank you for the question. Let me start off by first saying that, unfortunately this administration has divided this community for the children in the schools and the seniors or the homeowners or renters. And I say shame on this Administration, shame on this Council, shame on the financial task force, because the bottom line is this: this group knew that we were heading some tough waters back in June 20th of 2023, and you could see that in a City Council budget meeting when Council Bears met with the mayor behind closed doors to set up some sort of deal. We didn't know what that deal was but they created a financial task force and that Financial task force put together a plan of an override without anybody's knowledge, anybody's input, or any community participation. 
There are no issues with our school department. This is a fear tactic and fear tactic only, for the fact that we should remember this: back in April, back in May, back in June… when the city had $25 million in free cash. It was my responsibility to bring forth that we take that $5 million, Levy that budget, make sure there were no cuts, understand the process, and then move forward to see if we truly need an override, which I never said that shouldn't be an option. But to hear parents and teachers and friends and family say ‘George, explain this to me: Councilor Bears knew that this was going to be a devastating situation’
[Bears]: 30 seconds Counselor Scarpelli.
 but it could have been solved, and still could be solved, with free cash. We have plenty of free cash in the system not to turn the city upside down or divide this city. Now, remember.. I leave you with this: what we're asking for in the budget in this override doesn't mean you'll get exactly what you think you're going to get. Because all these cuts were made to set up this override as a fear tactic. So please…
[Bears] Thank you counselor Scarpelli, that’s two minutes.
[Scarpelli] Councelor Scarpelli is not against the children. We just hope that people understand that this could be solved. Thank you council president, I appreciate it.
[Bears] That's two minutes. Thank you counselor Scarpelli.
https://youtu.be/kP4iRYobyr0?t=36m22s
[Lemming] I’m just gonna say a few things really quick. 
[Bears] The council, oh I'll go to okay I'll wait
36:32
councilor is our councilor leming two minutes um one thing that I want to
36:38
mention about to answer the um Zoom of residents question Michelle um one thing
36:46
that we would lose if this question question seven in particular does not pass it's a very specific I believe it's
36:53
question seven it's very specific thing about the high school schedule uh which right now does not allow um some of the
37:01
students to who are taking specific classes I believe it's in the Vocational School to take certain art classes um
37:08
theater classes uh Visual Arts uh it it limits our students uh in being the
37:15
fully well-rounded students that we want them to be able to be um when you're in high school you want to be able to
37:21
explore um figure out who you are what you're interested in and um we want to give all of our students the best best
37:27
opportunity to be everything that they can be and we don't want to limit them because we haven't had the opportunity
37:33
to expand the schedule to really experiment with what that can be I will also say that in 2019 I uh worked for
37:41
the school district and I knew then that we were underfunded and I started thinking about running for city council
37:47
to make something like this happen this has been happening for a long time we have had underfunded schools for a long
37:52
time and this has been in the works for a long time this has needed to happen for quite a long time than thank
37:58
you Council let me two minutes saying that we can address the
38:05
budgetary problems of the Medford Public School System with free cash is like me
38:10
saying the government gave me a $1,200 check from covid so I don't have to look
38:17
for a job right now because that check is Gonna Last me another another two weeks it's the same thing the government
38:24
gave us the government gave the City of Medford some money it was a one-time thing from
38:30
Co and the proposal that we can plug ongoing costs from free cash all that
38:35
would do is drain our reserves and we'd be back at square one in five
38:42
years if these overrides don't pass straight up there will be layoffs in the
38:47
school system and the roads will continue to be in disrepair thank you thank you nope one time sorry it's
38:55
question eight yeah um and any other counselors want to go I'll be quick give
39:02
myself two minutes um just want to list it out uh two literacy interventionists two
39:09
Behavior Specialists one nurse four teachers and four department heads those were cuts that were postponed because we
39:14
used onetime funds this year to plug the Hole uh there's another 25 positions two school counselors four classroom
39:21
teachers two security monitors one attendance and re-engagement officer five par professionals and 12 .2
39:27
additional staff members uh that are on onetime federal funds this year so it's
39:33
about 35 to 45 staff in the schools we would not have
39:38
a permanent dedicated Street and sidewalk crew to use the machines that we already own we don't have enough staff in the DPW to actually run those
39:45
machines four times a week and uh there would not be room significant room for
39:51
looking at additional compensation for educators par professionals and staff in our schools whether that's just to raise
39:57
their pay because it's a contract year or whether that is when we're talking about extending potentially 10 to 15
40:03
minutes the school day to align vocational uh with the Comprehensive High School schedule or just to address
40:10
any issues on time on learning so thanks that's what we would lose we will go to
40:16
the podium name and address for the record please and you have one minute to ask one
40:22
question uh John mcgonagal um 20 raw Street Medford um
40:27
question is the um residential override not override the
40:35
assessments on each house that are going around now they're roughly around $60,000 for each house for the last
40:42
three years so if you take your $60,000 and you multiply it by your $9 a
40:48
th000 you're coming up to $540 a house every single year
40:55
so multiply that by your 26,700 houses that are in Medford which
41:02
is 13, 857,921
41:27
only going towards fixed costs so we have Union contracts increasing health insurance costs increasing retirement
41:33
pension costs increased cost of materials and pavement all that um so that's generally what the normal two and
41:39
a half New Growth increase goes towards and with that assessment one thing you didn't um put in as a cost increase to
41:46
the citizens of metred is your homeowners insurance your homeowners insurance if your residential area goes
41:54
up 160,000 over three years that's going to be probably another $3 $400 a year that I don't think anyone's
42:02
talked about yet sure so that was my question thank you does anyone else want to answer that
42:09
question I I I think uh if I can councelor scarelli I think I heard some similar uh situations with I know what
42:16
the assessor came up he gave us medium price homes but we're saying real people
42:22
have told me that this is what we're seeing we're seeing the increase close to $60,000 most homes that you're seeing
42:28
an increase at a higher higher percentage rate and again on top of all of what we talked about with this so
42:35
it's not the $13 a month the $40 a month it's the pieces that this gentleman just
42:40
said is the understanding that I never thought that the our uh home home
42:46
insurance now will now increase so again this isn't um this isn't them against us
42:52
this is understanding that we have viable options right now um um to fix
42:58
this with free cash and then work together to see how we can have an open
43:04
process to really include all the stakeholders to make sure that uh that
43:09
no one is hurt so thank you any other questions from answers
43:14
from members of the council seeing them we'll go to the next question on Zoom we'll go to Lizzy
43:21
charmino Lizzie you have one minute to ask one question please provide your name and address for the record
43:27
yes my name is Lizzie sharpino I live at 18 Stickney Road um so my question is why do we need to do the override now um
43:35
and in particular I'm curious to hear you speak to the rising inflation the last few years that has exceeded the
43:42
rate that the ly limit has been able to increase as well as which costs increase
43:47
even faster than inflation my understanding is that insurance and pensions and other fixed costs that the
43:53
city has to pay for are rising faster than inflation and faster than those Levy increases um I would also like to
44:00
hear you speak to the increase costs in schools that are um exceeding inflation rates and our inability as a city to
44:08
provide some basic infrastructure like maintenance of Roads due to our low budgets so if you could speak to why we
44:15
need this override now um especially in relation to those items I would like to hear that thank
44:24
you go to councelor Callahan thank you um so uh I think this is a
44:31
basic question why do we need these overrides um and as uh councelor leming stated uh we we we actually I will say
44:39
we rank 320th out of 351 Massachusetts cities and towns in the amount of budget
44:46
we have per person so we have less budget per person than every other city in Massachusetts and we have less budget
44:52
per person than 90% of towns all of the others that spend less per person than we do are much smaller than we are our
45:00
budget is too small to provide the services that we need um I want to go ahead I don't know this is probably
45:06
gonna be too small for people to see but this is a chart of our budget and this large Blue Area here is the schools um
45:15
that is what we are looking for more money for so we cannot cut that the next
45:20
one is uh insurance insurance is something that we required to have by
45:25
law we cannot cut that the next one is pensions those are contractual we cannot
45:32
cut pensions the next two are our fire department and our Police Department my
45:37
feeling is that no one on either side of the prop two and a half debate wants to cut drastically cut our police and fire
45:44
departments the next one after police and fire is our roads and I appreciate
45:50
your question about the roads because underfunding of our roads has caused us
45:55
to have 67 million dollars in essentially Road debt it's called a road backlog 30 seconds thank you um after
46:04
after that uh our bonds which we are also required to pay and then we get
46:09
down to smaller things the library facilities um many other small departments none of these if we even cut
46:16
the entire department could possibly fix the three million to5 million that we need for the school budget our budget is
46:23
simply too small I'll let someone else talk about which of these increases more than inflation thank you thank
46:29
you go to councelor leming two minutes so adding on to what councelor Callahan
46:35
said partially this is due to the lingering costs of covid which resulted
46:41
in both uh decrease funding going to the school system um partially that was just
46:47
because you have fewer students going into public schools and partially because um there was a lot of activity
46:53
in the Health Care system from covid so there is a sort of a so the cost of health insurance which we have to pay
47:00
ended up Rising those are some of the more short-term reasons why we need this now longer term uh the way that prop
47:06
tunap is designed is the total amount of money that the city can take in
47:12
basically can't go up by more than 2.5% every year while inflation on has
47:17
averaged for the past 44 years at 3.1% over time that compounds so the budget
47:23
today is only a fraction um about well it's only about 78% as valuable today as
47:29
it was uh back in 1980s so prop two and a half has this effect has this effect
47:35
longterm on Municipal budget where it squeezes resources most cities in Massachusetts have addressed this with
47:42
the intended uh mechanism for overcoming this which is periodic elections this is
47:47
just the first time we're doing that that's part of the reason and the fact that we're so late to the game there is
47:53
part of the reason that again we are 320 out of 351 cities in terms of our uh in
48:00
terms of our per capita budget and that is the reason why our schools could
48:06
definitely be doing better that is the reason why you see so many potholes this is one step in addressing that situation
48:14
once again free cash one-time funding um is not an actual longer term solution if
48:22
we just went with free cash that would be drained in a couple of years um shorter than the 45 year span I put I
48:30
said earlier and then thank you go to councelor scarpelli
48:37
of two minutes thank you so um I I think my council is not understanding me the free cash should be used now to fix a
48:43
problem now which we have and I appreciate the clarification it's only $3 million that Council County had just
48:49
said to fix the school budget but the the key issue isn't isn't the process of
48:55
getting this fixed now the problem that we've had we could use the pandemic and use the pandemic over and over again but
49:01
what what neighboring communities were doing during the pandemic with the infrastructure money that was given through Opa that was it intended for for
49:08
the roads and sidewalks that you're asking for right now armir didn't do that armir had to balance our budget
49:14
through Sr and arpa funding that's the easy way out that's like paying your mortgage with a credit card and I'll
49:21
tell you why this is the difference everybody has hasn't said it but the difference between why we're here
49:27
and we're in trouble is because of New Growth New Growth is what spurns what what pushes our our value our income up
49:35
it gives us more tax base it brings more money so we can do all the things we're talking about this mayor has done
49:41
nothing we haven't had shovel in the ground in five and a half years we're talking about I know my Council of
49:47
friends have gone out and told people that Massachusetts is the number one Medford is a number one Community new
49:52
growth in in in uh in permitting wrong I sat with the commission permitting their fine the biggest
49:59
concerns we're having look at the process that she lost fighting 40b
50:04
projects one project alone was three to point3 to5 million in permits 30 second
50:10
and then an additional 7 to9 million that would have come in in New Growth and one one job that she fought in court
50:17
lost and appealed it and this group had to leave the problem isn't isn't our tax
50:23
base because our assessments are up and we we're more than anybody else in neighboring communities because our
50:28
assessments are so high I will I will share my last Point neighbor communities
50:35
per per child Malden Arlington Winchester
50:40
between 15 and 177,000 Medford we pay $22,000 per student is it a management
50:46
issue or is it really we don't have enough money think about it because it's it's it's public
50:52
$22,000 thank you go to councelor saying
50:58
coun and then councelor Collins thank you two minutes thank you
51:03
um talking very quickly on the topic of New Growth I think our council is very aware that new growth is the priority for Medford and so when we look at um
51:11
when we look at the last three years of New Growth so the last two years plus the estimates that we have right in
51:17
front of us um presented by the assessor um it actually shows that our first
51:22
round of zoning reform which was the first round in almost 50 years of zoning reform actually has led to the most New
51:28
Growth our city has seen in decades we are currently working on round two of zoning reform and we are very very
51:34
optimistic that um that new growth will help us um achieve more financial
51:39
stability going into the future as long as these questions pass um I think I I
51:45
also have this chart right here if I'll pull a I'll do what councelor cahan does
51:51
it's not really easy to see but you can see that the new growth is growing um is
51:56
growing throughout the last few years with the reforms that we've instituted um we are permanating more units as that
52:03
chart back up zoom in on it we're also permitting more new um new units than
52:11
ever before as counselor um scarp States here's the thing um because new on on
52:19
the topic of New Growth we're getting a little bit away from the um the why now question um we have a plan that plan is
52:25
being implemented and the results are already bearing fruit we were fell fell behind decades I mean that's just the
52:32
truth we fell behind decades and I don't agree with every um decision that the Mayors previous have taken but we are in
52:38
a situation now where we need to face the facts as they are now High inflation
52:44
lack of new growth of the last few decades means that we need to do a short-term plan which is this these two
52:50
question these three questions and in a long-term plan which is investing in New Growth which is what our zoning effs
52:58
are thank you councelor Collins thank you president beis um I
53:03
appreciate the discussion from my fellow counselors on this topic um won't go into the topic of New Growth my fellow
53:09
counselors have covered that we are very optimistic about um how the council's current work on zoning and permitting
53:16
which we've been keeping up for two terms will continue to accelerate new growth and augment the city's operating
53:21
budget to the greatest extent possible um I do just want to note that on the issue of free cash to I think different
53:28
ways of framing the issue are helpful for Me Maybe for other people um it's uh it's no secret you know that
53:36
we acred um that we accured free cash over several years um and that was not
53:42
dispersed into savings accounts where it could be used and spent on Capital expenditures because our city unlike
53:48
almost every other city in town in Massachusetts uh before this year did not have any stabilization accounts now
53:53
we do that means that that money can go to the purposes that I think City staff and many residents really wanted it to
53:59
be going to expected it to be going to all along things like Capital expenses and also repairing our
54:05
infrastructure putting aside some of that money that's already been allocated to things that people could see out on the street helping our DPW and other
54:12
departments improve life and do basic maintenance in the city even if you say okay let's forget some of those Capital
54:17
expenses let's pretend that we still have $25 million in free cash just using an easy number um that's 1/8 of the
54:24
city's annual operating budget which means you know if if it's 1/8 you can understand how quickly we would run
54:30
through that if we were using that as things to plug the hole in the budget um and I do want to emphasize that doesn't include any Capital expenses whatso all
54:38
whatsoever um going back to the qu the uh the resident's question on why now I
54:43
think it comes down to we know that free cash is not sustainable we know that we're already Full Steam on New Growth
54:50
um but we need more and better funding and services for our residents now and I think the question is do we want punish
54:56
residents and students for past shortcomings by failing to invest now or do we want to take this opportunity to
55:03
start making Medford better for all residents and uh students in the public schools thank you councelor
55:09
Collins I think everybody went on that um I'd like to avoid everybody answering
55:15
every question if we can at all possible but everyone did give a different answer which is appreciated context um I'm just
55:21
going to be brief myself to ignore my own advice and say uh light poles are
55:27
falling down we had a meeting two weeks ago where a light pole fell on a public way and luckily it happened at night so
55:34
it didn't hit a car or a person and hurt them I mean that's the situation that we're in um we have finally appropriated
55:40
some funds to a capital stabilization fund we have a paper on at the meeting at 7 o'clock to look at that we are in a
55:47
historic multi-decade deficit where we have massive needs um the free cash that
55:54
is being spoken of is spoken for it is spoken for it needs to go to our roads it needs to go to our schools it
56:00
needs to go to fix things that are already broken um and thank you please stop
56:06
thank you and that's just reality um if we use that to plug operating budget
56:12
holes we'll have to plug those holes with new Revenue in the future we can't wait for the new growth from our new
56:18
zoning which will take five to 10 years to propagate um and I don't think any of us want more light posts falling and
56:24
this think we certainly should be grateful that so far they've only been falling at night thank you we'll go to
56:30
the podium for the next question you have one minute to ask one question name and address for the record please my
56:36
name is Moren tardelli 11 Chester Avenue Medford and this is my
56:42
question we Financial professionals business owners residents firefighters
56:48
School administrators teachers parents the chief assessor and the DPW
56:54
commissioner part of the financial task force thank you for your question would
57:01
anyone like to answer the question vice president Collins thank
57:08
you um the financial task force was a group explicitly made up of electeds to
57:14
consider the question of what we would put before our elected bodies to deal with Solutions around this problem um
57:21
however I feel really comfortable in saying that all of the uh above
57:26
types of people City staff members of the community um were consulted in various ways formally and informally
57:32
throughout this process some that people talked to some that members of the financial task task force talked to
57:38
while we were considering these matters that were discussed um in our meetings some of that were explicitly consulted
57:44
um and uh others that have just been part of this greater conversation around what should we do with about what should
57:49
we do about chronic underfunding in Medford over the course of months and months and years and years of challenges
57:55
that have led up to this year in which we are um working together to try to
58:01
solve these issues once and for all instead of having budget season after budget season where the school budget um
58:06
is essentially held hostage by our inability to raise enough money um to at
58:12
to to provide the services that residents students and teachers uh expect and deserve um and I also just
58:18
want to underline um again that these ballot questions every single resident every single voter in Medford whether
58:24
you're a parent a teacher a union member um somebody who works for the city who also lives in the city you get to use
58:30
your voice you get to cast your vote you can vote Yes on all three you can vote no on all three you can choose which
58:35
ones you feel comfortable voting yes and voting no on you were a part of this conversation because every single person who votes gets a vote thank
58:47
you thank you any other one anyone want to yeah I can Mr President minutes thank
58:52
you so again this financial task force was put together with without any any
58:57
individual involved in that that comment that uh young lady put forth this was
59:03
done in a bubble this was done behind closed doors it wasn't planned to educate our seniors educate our
59:10
residents educate our renters educate our landlords so they could prepare themselves for what's being asked for
59:17
within a a vote that was presented a discussion was presented on a Thursday voted on a t on a Tuesday not one
59:24
community meeting and as a matter of fact I will share this with everybody there was a Foye requests uh put out by
59:32
a resident that asked a simple question they ask for all of the information
59:37
minutes for the meetings any information letters any emails any text messages
59:44
with this financial task force with any any building or any entity within the city to figure out if this is needed or
59:50
how will be used and how it can work 150 Pages later all the information that was
59:56
in that foyer request were information about when we can meet nothing that's
1:00:01
solid I would also share with these parents that are so concerned about what's happening we were saw that uh the
1:00:09
information back from the school department the school department communications director answered by
1:00:15
saying uh thank you for the foyer request we apologize for the tardy response but after uh investigating
1:00:22
there was no school department employee or member of the school department involved in any Financial task force uh
1:00:29
dealing with these overrides so what again what we're saying is we don't know if if an override is needed we know one
1:00:37
thing we know we could fix this issue right now with free cash so our students
1:00:42
and teachers and families are fine and then we go back to the drawing board as a community together to see what we
1:00:49
really need if the mayor isn't going to put new growth out there she's not going to work to bring in creatively bring in
1:00:54
funding for the city maybe we can look at it so thank
1:01:03
you CAD thank you um I hear uh a lot of people asking about free cash I think
1:01:09
misunderstanding what free cash is um first thing I like to say is free cash dumb name it's not free it's not cash
1:01:15
okay so free cash sorry Rick Rick come on Rick free free cash don't shout in
1:01:21
this room you know better and you wouldn't take it if you were you wouldn't take it if you were sitting up here Rick don't let's not go down this
1:01:27
road come on everyone stop let's not go down this road guys it's really not needed councelor Callahan you have the
1:01:33
floor I to get my two minutes will I get my two minutes yeah we'll go back to two minutes thank you
1:01:39
um free cash is the term that the state uses for the money that is left over
1:01:47
after your budget season has ended so it's the difference between what you budget which let's say is $180 million
1:01:54
and the amount you spent which let's say is $172 million that $8 million which is
1:01:59
the difference is called free cash now the state of Massachusetts has a group
1:02:05
called The Division of local services and their job is to help cities and towns become financially
1:02:11
responsible they highly recommend that cities and towns in Massachusetts have
1:02:17
three to five% of their budget left over in free cash every single year in
1:02:22
Medford that amount would be between 5 million and $9 million if you don't have
1:02:28
between three and 5% of your budget left over in free cash you are considered financially irresponsible by Credit
1:02:34
Agencies and your bond rating goes down now that is very bad because it changes
1:02:39
just like if your credit rating is bad it changes the amount that you have to spend anytime you borrow money so we
1:02:45
want to be a financially responsible City so having money left over in free cash and I'm gonna you know I have
1:02:53
another chart here because um I think it's important for people to understand that this city was in the past very
1:03:01
financially irresponsible if you notice that before 2012 we couldn't even meet
1:03:06
our budget many years we had we definitely never reached that 3% in free
1:03:12
cash and our bond rating was terrible so it's only in recent years that we have begun to have anywhere close to the
1:03:19
required 3% in free cash now free cash according to the state of Massachusetts
1:03:25
should never be used for an operating budget it needs to be used for capital projects we currently because of
1:03:31
underfunding of our roads have 67 million in Road debt we have $79 million
1:03:36
in our Capital Improvement plan for things that need to be done only in the next three to five years 10 seconds so
1:03:43
we cannot use free cash for something like our school budget that is absolutely verboten according to
1:03:50
financially responsible people in the state of Massachusetts thank you
1:03:56
councelor Callahan tell them the truth councel thank you councelor Callahan um as a member of the financial
1:04:02
task force uh was very clear uh we actually had a lot of public meetings it's called fiscal 23 budget process
1:04:09
fiscal 24 budget process fiscal 25 budget process I think a lot of folks
1:04:15
remember um if you're watching those meetings me sitting in that chair in
1:04:20
20122 and uh being pretty hard on this mayor because we didn't have the information that we needed and working
1:04:28
to establish uh a task force working to establish a budget ordinance working to
1:04:34
establish a flow of information and hear from stakeholders all the stakeholders that were mentioned in the question what
1:04:40
do we need what are we not seeing happen why are we in the situation that we're in that resulted this year in the
1:04:46
earliest budget process we've had with meetings before we got the budget input from the council and the and the public
1:04:53
before the mayor presented a budget and and a full and accounting of what our
1:05:00
serious structural deficit is for our schools and for this city we know that we need more money to
1:05:06
do what people want the city to do we're asking the voters to do that and that's
1:05:12
what it it's what it is if the voters say no then we will have to make cuts and we will do that because that is what
1:05:17
the voters decided if the voters choose to vote Yes then we will have the financial resources that we need to do
1:05:24
our jobs that is essentially what happened that is essentially the choice
1:05:29
before us as a community when we want to talk about the financial task force was announced in a public meeting there are
1:05:35
a bunch of public releases from that every step of the way we're starting to meet here's what we're talking about
1:05:41
here's what we're considering for the framework here is the final framework the specifics were discussed extensively
1:05:47
in Council meetings and school committee meetings for a year that these were our budget needs thank you
1:05:57
we'll go to the podium for the next question Mr Jones name and address to record you have a minute for your question yes sir Bob Jones 5 St Mary
1:06:04
Street Medford Mass I'd like to start with expressing my condolences for Larry lore the city messenger thank you great
1:06:11
guy probably one of the longest serving city employees yeah it's always there he's been a staple there he's always
1:06:16
done a great job and I'm GNA I'm going to give you5 seconds I just want to say for folks who have joined since I started the meeting we're going to be
1:06:22
talking about Larry at our meeting after this and I hope folks have something they want to share we'll stick around we want to hear he will be missed thank you
1:06:29
and I thank you I thank you for this uh format as well uh there are so many things I'd like to ask I have to keep it
1:06:34
at one but it's regarding the financial task force so the financial task correct me if I go wrong here was councel be
1:06:42
councel Collins uh school committee person Jenny Graham mayor Longo Kern and Nina narian
1:06:49
correct yes yes okay so there was no it was councelor Morel before January counc okay yeah so the audit of the was not
1:06:56
present was not part of the force the task force the assessor was not part of the task force the school Finance
1:07:01
director was not part of the task force and uh let's see one other person Financial director Financial director
1:07:07
I'm sorry uh Bob uh Bob Dixon he was not part of the task force correct okay so
1:07:13
now understood the uh where can I find that documents any data calculations
1:07:21
discussions uh any sort of um metrics that were Ed used from the financial
1:07:27
task force to show how the numbers of 30 million for the debt exclusion and the
1:07:33
prop 2 and a half of 7 A5 million and how was that determined the
1:07:39
30 million was not stated in the debt exclusion which is no it's never stated
1:07:44
in a debt exclusion I believe amount so I'm just wondering where that came that came from I'm hearing from the
1:07:51
administration uh 30 million and not to die more so that's uh something I've heard offand so that's my question where
1:07:58
can I find documents from the financial task force showing how these discussions numbers and Figures were determined
1:08:05
thank you I'll go to vice president Collins two minutes thank you for the question um
1:08:11
again speaking as a member of the financial task force um I want to try to put this a different way because maybe I wasn't um I want to try putting this
1:08:20
differently the financial task force this group of electeds um
1:08:26
Tas with and the chief of staff right electeds and the chief of staff as the as the mayor's staff yes um if I had a
1:08:34
staff person I probably want them with me taking notes as well um our assignment was to create a
1:08:42
proposal for a political solution to a CommunityWide problem and that is why this task force was made up of electeds
1:08:49
I think folks who are asking the question rightfully so of why did you come up with what you came up with
1:08:57
um should look to the hours and hours of tape that we have of the public meetings
1:09:02
that we've had in this Chambers between the city council and the school committee where we discuss that question
1:09:08
in terms of why $7 and a half million um gosh there's a lot of school
1:09:15
committee meetings enumerating exactly what would be cut in various different budget scenarios to back up why we think
1:09:21
that this is the number that is at the Nexus of what we know that we need and what we think that we can reasonably ask
1:09:27
of the residents to strike that sweet spot between trying to maintain an
1:09:32
equitable and deserved School experience for Medford Public School students with something that the community um can be
1:09:39
comfortable with and can say yes to um it is our job as people who run for offices instead of going to planning
1:09:45
school and trying to get a job in City Hall um to try to come up with um you
1:09:50
know for lack of a better word political solutions to real life CommunityWide problems that is what the task force
1:09:56
sought to do and now everybody gets the chance to vote on it thank you anyone else Council
1:10:02
scarelli sure uh let me help you Mr Jones this financial task force was a
1:10:07
farce there was a lack of transparency throughout when you speak on I speak to
1:10:14
this in where my I worked in 2009 when we met in a possible override in a neighboring Community we talked about
1:10:20
three things it was how do we get here what do we do to fix it and how does it happen again and those people brought in
1:10:28
mines from toughs Harvard MIT Medford not one person they brought in their
1:10:34
their financial team Medford not one person they had their assessor set the rate so people can understand assessor
1:10:40
was never involved when you look at how this was done this was done in a bubble this was presented on a Thursday and
1:10:47
then voted for in the budget meetings if you look at the budget meetings when I brought up the the the the way to fix it
1:10:53
which is free cash and I'll agree I'll disagree with my fellow counselor because she's wrong a
1:11:00
th% free cash for divisional local Services it's not recommended but not
1:11:06
against the law to use Free Cash 3 to 5% annual budget fy2 24 method
1:11:12
generated $9 million to add to a $25 million estimate which means the city
1:11:18
had around 16% of free cash but again the solution was very simple let's have
1:11:25
this this financial task force present this to the community because that's what I asked for I asked my colleagues
1:11:30
when are we going to present what what the findings were there were no findings it was just given we're going to do an override people came up cheered the
1:11:37
mayor was happy and it was done the truth of the matter is you're right there was no one involved this was done
1:11:44
in a bubble to scare people to come out and say the schools the kids and I'll
1:11:50
say it again I said this in April I said in May I'll say it today again I we might might need an override but if we
1:11:56
do it right with open and transparent government we could do something great now remember with one override in every
1:12:03
other community there's two three to follow and don't forget this council is going to ask for a00 to $400 million
1:12:10
debt exclusion for new high school which we need so this is fear please don't be
1:12:15
confused they're not telling you the truth thank counc scarelli thank you
1:12:25
just on a little bit there's no there's no followup sorry Bob I'm trying to clarify something that was just spoken about by the two councils here okay is
1:12:33
free cash it's about free cash three to 5% is a total an aggregate total not
1:12:39
every year right so that's where that figure comes from got it I just I wanted to answer your question okay I think uh
1:12:46
you heard a good story um but the fact of the matter is there were five members of the
1:12:53
financial task force the council president the council vice president the chair of the school committee who's the mayor the vice chair of the school
1:12:58
committee and the chief of staff for the mayor who administratively run City Hall those were the members of the task force
1:13:05
those were the those were the members of the task force did we talk to other people absolutely the $3 million number
1:13:13
comes from the school Finance director from the fiscal 25 budget process $500,000 number for the DPW Street and
1:13:19
sidewalk crew comes from the DPW commissioner the $4 million number for the uh question eight that comes also
1:13:26
from the fiscal 25 and 24 school budget process from the finance director from many of the administrators in the
1:13:32
menford public schools talking about this is what we need to do the things that people are asking us to do and the
1:13:37
$30 million Bond number for the fire headquarters came from the mayor the chief of staff and the fire chief based
1:13:44
on the design process for the new headquarters that's where it came from it's not a bubble it's not we didn't
1:13:50
talk to anybody it's not we made things up there have been documented meetings we talked to other people we engaged the
1:13:57
folks who have the information in the city and said if we're trying to address these problems what would it cost and
1:14:03
that's what the proposals are I mean it's plain as day we have again public statements and documents for a year
1:14:11
talking about the process the membership the framework and the final result we have budget meetings and documents for
1:14:18
over two and a half three years dozens of recordings of this body and the
1:14:25
school committee talking about these needs um so I encourage folks to look at the last three budget processes because
1:14:31
they'll pretty much get you exactly the numbers that you'll see on the ballot on November 5th and that's why we're asking voters to vote yes thank
1:14:39
you councilor leming um sorry just to go back on a three to five percent thing
1:14:44
it's not three to five percent in totality it actually is recommended to generate three to five% in free cash
1:14:50
every year so that is correct I'm not sure where you're getting I'm I'm going
1:14:55
to no like you can Google it you can you can look it up I I encourage you to um
1:15:01
but the point is you generate three to 5% in free cash and then it goes that can aggregate over time and then that
1:15:07
can go towards one-time Capital expenditures like for instance uh two new fire trucks for the fire department
1:15:13
that's how these big that's how these sort of uh I'd say midsize expenses are
1:15:18
accounted for again if I have a savings account and I'm living
1:15:25
um I'm living above my means then eventually the savings account would run out so you're not supposed to plug the
1:15:34
school budget every single year with free cash uh because it would run out eventually we did that with $1.75
1:15:42
million this past year with the understanding that we would then do an override to try to fix the problem in
1:15:48
the long term free cash is not a long-term solution that keeps getting repeated and I really just want to drive
1:15:54
the went home it is not actually an answer to this problem it it is a choice
1:15:59
it can be used uh I believe the bond rating is based on the total free cash
1:16:05
thank you Mr Jones thank you we'll go to zoom for the next question we'll go to Zoe mutos one minute to ask your
1:16:11
question name and address for the record please hi Zoe MOS 33 Johnson Avenue um
1:16:19
I'm really appreciative that the city after 40 years has decided to allow the voters to decide side on this matter I
1:16:26
have taken my time to educate Myself by listening to school committee meetings and which were heartbreaking I've
1:16:32
listened to these City Council meetings and I feel confident and not afraid or like I'm being scared about how do we
1:16:39
how we got here how we're going to fix it and how we make sure it happens again my question does revolve around free
1:16:45
cash because as I understand it we have allocated some of that money that we had
1:16:50
like I've heard things like we had well we plugg the city uh school budget but
1:16:56
also potentially fixing fixing HVAC at the at the middle schools Etc so I'd
1:17:02
like to know what's been used up how much is left and in the event that the override doesn't pass and we use free
1:17:09
cash again what are the r of using it up and not having that rainy day fund which I think have already been answered thank
1:17:18
you go members of the council to answer that question councilor leming to minutes so
1:17:26
in terms of how much free cash we actually have left uh I I don't have the numbers right in front of me but um I'm
1:17:32
just I'm just remembering the expenditures off the top of my head we I believe after it was certified this past
1:17:38
June the number was 34 million but I believe enough of that has been earmarked for VAR onetime expenditures
1:17:45
at this point so that the actual number is correct me if I'm wrong would be about 10 to 11 million in reserves right
1:17:53
now just because um see someone I can see someone shaking their head in the audience but I
1:18:00
believe no um so so so again it this is this is ballpark numbers because we did
1:18:06
allocate free cash first for the stabilization funds which recently went to things like those uh T those uh light
1:18:14
those light posts that were falling over that were you know rusted um they went to $3 million for the new uh Ms for the
1:18:22
msba study it went to pay for uh HVAC systems it went to pay
1:18:30
for there's a yeah there there's there's a long there's a long list of of items I
1:18:35
were in some memos from a from a couple of months ago that I think some of my colleagues could help me
1:18:43
out go to councel saying two minutes yes thank you um I
1:18:49
mean continuing off of councelor lemming's points um those conversations are ones that we're having in public I
1:18:55
believe that there's an upcoming um City uh Committee of whole meeting at some point that we're going to talk about
1:19:02
some of how free cash is going to be used I know the mayor submitted a paper to us with her proposal and asking us
1:19:08
for feedback that's all in the council records it's all online um for folks to find as well um here's the thing about
1:19:16
free cash right because it's a onetime fund we should be using it on onetime expenses um and that's why we're using
1:19:23
it on things like roads on the light polls that um president be was talking about um on H systems and
1:19:31
whatnot we all know that these are real things that affect how we experience living in our city it affects our kids
1:19:37
in our public buildings um and so they are very important expenses now added on top of that is the conversation we would
1:19:44
have if we didn't spend that money right now right because if we defer maintenance which I think everyone in
1:19:50
the audience today acknowledges this has has been happening in that if we defer
1:19:55
maintenance those costs go up as well and so we need to basically map out all
1:20:00
of our uses and that's why our city has been um implementing our Capital Improvement plans why we've take started
1:20:06
to take Registries of everything that um that we're falling about behind on on
1:20:11
maintenance our buildings director is really good with that work um and so that's why those funds should be
1:20:18
allocated to things like that rather than being used one time on recurring expenses that we can't afford in future
1:20:25
um so I I feel very strongly about that 30 seconds the bond agencies feel very strongly about that and in fact if we
1:20:31
take the free cash to and use that free cash on recurring expenses it's widely known that the bond agencies would lower
1:20:38
our lower our credit rating as councilor Callahan mentioned and our cost for borrowing to do that maintenance work in
1:20:43
the future would actually go up and so that's something that would be an increased cost on all of us as taxpayers
1:20:50
in the city Mr President Council two B thank uh another Fair tactic so people should
1:20:56
understand the May came out just the other day we had 34 million 34.5 million
1:21:01
as of July 1st the mayor just so you know what free cash is it's your money
1:21:06
so when we say we're going to we're going to fund 50 teachers and we don't pay those 50 teachers because they don't
1:21:12
hire them that money goes into free cash that's our money that J tax money and then it could be used for what it needs
1:21:19
to be so it's truly mismanagement of funds from our leadership team it's
1:21:25
taking what we sign off for in our budget and not use correctly so what we
1:21:30
have right now I believe I've I've said this Council leming said it over and over again I'm not saying use free cash
1:21:36
every year we have a deficit right now correct that we can correct right now
1:21:42
and not put the schools and kids and teachers in fear and say let's level fund that budging using onetime free
1:21:48
cash one time and then look into what options we have later but let's listen to the mayor what she said 3 4.5 million
1:21:56
now she knows the override is going to be a fight what does she do boom she starts putting all these different
1:22:01
monies in different accounts so from her words exactly in her video the other day we have 18.5 million with that said we
1:22:10
can still take funding to level the school budget and still have 1415 million which still leaves enough in
1:22:17
there that would appease any bond rating so again let's not get scared because
1:22:22
that's a scar tactic let's see the bond rating so we can move forward now when we look at this situation Council
1:22:30
different communities free cash Arlington has 18 million framan 14 million bigger budget Quincy 1.2 million
1:22:38
bigger budget and overa 14 million Newton these communities are bigger than
1:22:43
ours we had this budget the the they they function with lower lower uh funding in free cash so
1:22:51
understand this everyone we can do this onetime cost to save the fear from our schools take care of
1:22:57
our seniors our renters our our homeowners so we can stop the fear in this community so don't please do vote
1:23:04
no on this o these overrides they're not needed right now it was done in a bubble it wasn't transparent thank you thank
1:23:10
you we go to councelor Callahan two minutes councelor Callahan
1:23:16
then councelor Collins very quickly the reason that those other cities don't have as much money in free cash is
1:23:22
because they weren't last to the table in getting a stabilization fund having a stabilization fund again is considered
1:23:29
financially responsible Medford didn't have one was L out of 451 cities and towns in Massachusetts we
1:23:36
are one of the last five only five remained this year that did not have a stabilization fund that's why we have
1:23:43
all this free cash because we didn't have any stabilization funds thank you go to councelor
1:23:51
Collins two minutes thank you um not to put too fine a point on it but
1:23:58
I think we've all acknowledged behind the rail that we have problems this year and let's say hypothetically that our
1:24:04
free cash was not already already allocated to Capital funds that our department heads have been advocating
1:24:09
for in many cases for years and years and years and being pushed off because we didn't have the money to allocate
1:24:16
towards those Capital expenses and now we're finally able to start chipping away at that very very long list of
1:24:22
projects on our Capital Improvement plan let's just put aside that point and say
1:24:28
hypothetically what if we still had unallocated free cash that we could use on an operating budget which we don't
1:24:34
because it's allocated to capital projects I think that there's a shared acknowledgement behind this rail that
1:24:40
that does put us back at square one and we have to revisit this conversation again in May for fiscal 26 with no
1:24:47
better Solutions than we do now so I've asked myself what would I cut if we then
1:24:53
approaching fiscal 26 with no better off because New Growth takes five to 10
1:25:00
years to really flourish into that robustly improved commercial tax base
1:25:05
and we haven't taken advantage of accelerating our tax levy so that we
1:25:10
can try to get in in fighting distance of where inflation has put us as a
1:25:16
community and now we don't have the cash reserves that again are hypothetical at this point because we already know that
1:25:22
we need them for Capital expenses and we have to balance the budget for f for fiscal 26 what would I cut 30 seconds
1:25:30
there's nothing to cut thank you thank you anyone else from the council want to
1:25:35
go on this question just to councelor Lemmings Point uh there was the 34 million
1:25:41
certified balance at the end of June six million went to a stabilization fund 5
1:25:46
million went to a capital stabilization fund 1 million of that has already been spent on Emer emergency Capital repairs
1:25:53
3 million went to the msba feasibility study the mayor also outlined an additional 9.5 million uh 2.5 million
1:26:02
for Fleet fire department Fleet Replacements $2 million for the pension liability which we have to fund by 2034
1:26:08
2 million per year for fiscal year 25 Capital Improvements 2 million for fiscal year 26 Capital Improvements 1
1:26:15
million to match federal and state money to renovate the hegner center we also have the estimated 15 million that we
1:26:21
heard the other week from assistant superintendent ing to fix the HVAC at the Andrews middle school and mcglinn K
1:26:28
k38 School councelor Callahan has noted the $67 million in Road debt $35 million
1:26:34
in sidewalk debt uh people have noted the school water issue um you know as Mr
1:26:40
bellson said we made money on those schools but apparently we did it because we didn't put the right stuff in for water so um I just spent all 35 million
1:26:49
right there on things that are Urgent right there we're still going to have to Prior prze these urgent Capital needs
1:26:56
with that free cash and stabilization fund money there's 18.5 left yeah that's
1:27:02
plus there's the money in the stabilization F yeah I just went beyond that though because it's called Scare
1:27:07
Tactics it's not a scare tactic it's just math it's just math that is the need of the community I could not name
1:27:13
you a community in the state more please don't interrupt me thank you
1:27:19
I don't interrupt you please don't interrupt me thank you those are the figures those our
1:27:24
needs um those are the capital needs of the community so I think the math is
1:27:31
pretty clear go to the podium for our next question one minute name and address for
1:27:37
the record please good evening Nick jleo gleo 40
1:27:42
Robinson wrad so on the subject of the math um my question relates to um
1:27:49
essentially you know these overrides and so-called consequences of not passing of not approving of them um so we're
1:27:56
hearing kind of these expressions of certainty used to describe what will happen if the overrides don't pass we've
1:28:01
heard from councelor bears there will be Cuts we've heard from councelor lemming the roads won't be repaired so my
1:28:08
question is you know where is this math I mean where is for the average citizen who's not a mathematician you know where
1:28:14
are we going to see this data that shows that these consequences will actually result uh if these overrides don't pass
1:28:21
I've looked and I haven't really been able to find anything so where do I
1:28:27
go anyone want to go for that councelor Collins thank you I'm sure that my fellow counselers will add to this list
1:28:33
but um just to reference some of the data points that have been coming up um
1:28:38
multiple times in this meeting and particular I'd guide you to the um pavement management plan that was put out by the DPW some years ago and that's
1:28:45
a few years out of date now but it details the was actually updated last year oh never mind updated last year um
1:28:51
that details the um like $200 million in um backlog of Road
1:28:58
repairs that are needed um for more detail on the needs in the schools I
1:29:03
would direct you to um really any of the budget Cycles uh the recent budget Cycles school committee meetings um fi23
1:29:09
or fy2 24 which I think go into the level of detail that folks are really curious about when it comes to what is at stake what actually does go on The
1:29:16
Chopping Block each year and that is brought back depending on aser funding when that was available or other onetime funds um and I think that the capital
1:29:23
Improvement plan also a really interesting um augment to those operating costs that show how much money
1:29:29
um really needs to be funded to um on the infrastructural and maintenance side that we are really waiting to have the
1:29:34
funding for yeah but dat you know data on we're not doing we're not doing fall just it's just it's not a clarification
1:29:41
what's the question to to her response we're not doing that so i' appreciate what we're we're we're just asking one
1:29:47
question thank you just just clarifying her answer because I'm not quite understanding we we'll go we'll think
1:29:52
about it um who's next counil I'm just trying to enforce the
1:29:59
rules let me rephrase that I'll think about it councelor
1:30:04
leming oh we're giv the answers councelor leming thank you no just uh
1:30:09
councelor leming thank you just just like to just like to really emphasize that if you're interested in learning
1:30:15
more about the shortfalls in the school um in the uh Medford Public Schools
1:30:20
budget then the videos and the presentations that were given uh in
1:30:26
during the budget season at the uh Medford school committee meetings I believe around June would be where you
1:30:32
want to go so those are on YouTube thank you thank you anyone else want to answer a question sure two minutes so again Mr
1:30:40
julo these are all Scare Tactics again the financial task force didn't have the
1:30:47
fourar requests that shows that there were no documentations no minutes no
1:30:52
information given we heard the assessor we know all the major parties the school department the assessor the finance
1:30:59
director weren't involved in these issues this is this it's not a lie we're gonna talk we just said it we heard it
1:31:06
put 30 seconds back on for interrupting me we have we have the understanding that that they the sky is falling all of
1:31:14
these projects that we need to fix we need to fund in normal communities what we do is we Bond these projects when we
1:31:21
look at situations that we talked about ear earlier when it's um what we're
1:31:26
trying what we're seeing here right now Mr joio it's the um the underfunding of local revenues or the um the under
1:31:35
uh one second I'll just it's it's the focus of what we're seeing that that our
1:31:40
community has done for years here and that's low show lower males tax and and
1:31:45
hotel tax and excise tax so then when it comes higher you could put that and use it for whatever you want let that be
1:31:51
known the understanding what you're asking for there are no numbers the problem we hear right now why the city's
1:31:57
divided why our seniors are scared why our landlords are scared why our homeowners and reters are afraid right
1:32:02
now why our students and parents and and and teachers are afraid it's because this group did something they put it out
1:32:09
there without any true information so we don't know what's going on we haven't been educated that's why there's so much
1:32:15
fear the firefighters aren't supporting a $30 million fire station because again there was no transparency there when it
1:32:21
came to the final decision that had to be made for 30 and they've decided to go public they've decided to go public to
1:32:28
say let's not hurt our taxpayers with a whatever how many it's going to be because we don't know it could be a $50
1:32:34
million fire station but the design was never put forth through the the firefighters so when you st in totality
1:32:41
six seven and eight we haven't been involved Mr jalo there are no numbers there is no information because this
1:32:47
group did it in a financial task force that presented it on a Thursday voted on a on a Tuesday and then we find $9
1:32:55
million in free cash after that that the man scar what is it you're over by 20
1:33:02
seconds oh can I say one more thing no okay you'll get it on the next round
1:33:09
sure I'm sure you'll get it on the next round appreciate anyone else want to comment here from the council you already went vice president Collins
1:33:16
sorry no one gets mad when I don't like counselor Collins talk um just try to
1:33:23
enforce the rules here if you have a quick clarification on the kind of data you're asking for I'd be
1:33:28
interested to hear it I'm just the clarification I'm requesting here is are we saying that
1:33:33
um that various reports and data showing that there are certain needs are the
1:33:38
same thing as saying that if we don't pass this overrides that this X or Y
1:33:44
will happen you know are those two exactly equivalent they don't seem exactly equivalent to me I can answer
1:33:49
that um and I'll put my clock on so for much of it for the school budget yes
1:33:57
the school budget director outlined in the budget meetings in April and May and June this is what would be cut if we
1:34:03
didn't have these funds and this is what would have to be cut if we don't have these funds in the future so in that case it is an exact one: one and that's
1:34:10
true for all of question seven when we talk about the DPW the director said to
1:34:16
run the machines four days a week instead of two or four days a month I need this much staff this is how much
1:34:22
that crew would cost absolutely for the debt exclusion for the fire station counselor scarelli already noted right
1:34:29
we have Bond Capac we're Max on our bond capacity we have a library on the bond capacity we have a police station on the
1:34:34
bond capacity we have school MHS Labs on the bond capacity we're pretty much maxed on the bond capacity here um and
1:34:43
okay well we wouldn't know that because it's literally in the budet it's in the budget you're wrong
1:34:51
I'm not wrong I I read the thing um so when we talk about the information
1:34:56
that's available to the public there's information from the school budget process from the city budget process
1:35:03
that outlines these needs very clearly there have been charts and tables and
1:35:09
narratives and whatever other form of data analysis you want has likely been presented at these meetings so um there
1:35:15
is information out there there is data out there and when we talk about the decisions made by the financial task force while other members of the city
1:35:23
staff were not members of the financial task force they were consulted they were dis these issues were discussed with
1:35:29
them so um that is what it is and we can continue to try to present the math and
1:35:35
information in a different way uh and I'm sure that we will continue to try to get that information out there as best
1:35:41
as possible but um the city has incredible needs significant needs and funding is needed to meet
1:35:48
them thank you um I'm only have one hand raised on Zoom but it's iPhone 109 if
1:35:55
you would please rename yourself so that we know that you're a person I'll then recognize you until then I'll go to the
1:36:01
podium name and address for the record please you have one minute for your question uh Ron Gino 326 east border
1:36:07
road my question has to do with the financial task force as a proud member of both the Columbus renaming committee
1:36:14
and the new newly ending Charter committee we had rules of agenda
1:36:19
reporting minute reporting public participation I would like somebody to answer the question what makes this task
1:36:26
force exempt from that and my final comment is nobody in this room thinks the school system or the city services
1:36:32
are fully funded Trust Me Nobody Does the question we have in front of us is is this the Band-Aid that is going to
1:36:39
get us through until the next time we convene for the next two the next two and a half proposal or the ominous 200
1:36:47
million plus renovation of the school that's what we're voting on tonight appreciate your answers thank you
1:36:55
anyone want to go for it I can do the financial task force part um anyone want
1:37:00
to talk about the sufficiency of the size of the override councilor liming two minutes so
1:37:08
for the size of the override what I'll say is that we got uh we went 44 years
1:37:14
without an override and this is the first time that we're asking uh the voters to uh to do an override which is
1:37:23
has become very common place in other communities and so um yeah if we I you
1:37:29
know they're potentially is um a dead exclusion in the future for uh the high
1:37:35
school as a capital project um but in terms of uh just in terms of level
1:37:41
expenses the overrides are a mechanism to undo to uh overcome the effects of
1:37:48
inflation long term so I will just point out that we've gone this long without override and this is the first time that
1:37:55
we're asking for it so we've survived pretty long so far um and that and we're
1:38:03
pretty late to the game to be honest um will another override be needed in another 44 years maybe because
1:38:11
inflation will keep going up but uh right now we know that we need this or
1:38:17
else again the roads will uh continue to be in the state that they're in and we will have to have
1:38:24
a lot of layoffs that's not a scare tactic that's just that's just the truth it's just math so thank
1:38:31
you thank you Council AAR two minutes um we
1:38:38
are I would paraphrase councelor lemming and say that we aren't all even asking
1:38:45
for an override we are giving the voters of Medford the opportunity to raise their own taxes if they would
1:38:53
like you can vote now you're allowed to we're we're here um to answer questions
1:38:59
about it um not to convince anybody to do anything we're just telling you what we know um and what we have the luxury
1:39:07
of knowing from having this job um another thing I will say is that um
1:39:13
historic underfunding has led to and and having never passed an override before has led to such scenarios as me
1:39:20
receiving an email uh that is lead in the water at the Brooks Elementary School where my kids go because of
1:39:28
fixtures in the building in a school that was built after the year 2000
1:39:34
because Corners were cut because money was tried they were trying to save money
1:39:39
when they built the schools that's what happens when you don't fund your city so
1:39:45
we can keep trying to do that we can keep trying to not fund our city that's a choice that the voters have and every
1:39:53
everybody that's democracy so we all have the opportunity everybody has the opportunity so we're here to answer your
1:39:59
questions we're not trying to say you're good or you're bad or you're doing whatever but I really hope I hope that
1:40:07
we are making decisions um they might be hard decisions but
1:40:12
we're making decisions that are taking care of each other that are uh prioritizing the people that we care
1:40:18
about and we're um understanding the fiscal responsibility that we have toward W each other thank you anyone else want to
1:40:26
go on this councelor scarelli anyone else councelor scarelli two
1:40:35
minutes with the fair tactics right it's the schools right it's it's Council
1:40:42
lemming said it over and over again well we haven't done it so let's do it right just because we haven't done it let's do
1:40:48
it now the roads now we hear the the the schools were built back
1:40:53
so it's all fear this is all fear but here's the thing we're not saying that
1:40:59
let's not look at this properly and and do it together this is the problem we're
1:41:05
doing it in a bubble we're doing it so privately we're doing it where it's going to hurt so many people you know
1:41:13
the finger pointing between teachers and finger pointing between between seniors
1:41:18
and kids and it's a shame what you're doing we can correct the right now with
1:41:24
the free cash no matter what they say the truth of the matter is we have free cash to make sure that seven and8 are
1:41:31
correctable we know question six is correctable by listening to our firefighters who who will tell you
1:41:38
straightforward that the mayor's not telling the truth they what they're building there is insufficient and it's
1:41:44
going to put us 30 years behind in five years so please understand this Mr
1:41:50
javino when you say all this information and how it gets out we haven't done that even though councils want to say we did
1:41:56
we haven't we haven't prepared our seniors for what's going to happen on January 1 to 2025 once the new assess
1:42:03
once the new tax bills come out we haven't done that we haven't prepared our our our our landlords to how are
1:42:09
they're going to handle single parent uh renters in their home we haven't prepared our renters when increase goes
1:42:15
up and here's another one somebody called me when I put a post out about a woman that called me says two she has
1:42:21
two children and the landlord said I'm not going to hit you with the assessment raay but I'm going to be honest with you
1:42:27
I got to tell you I'm going to have to hit I'm going to have to raise your rent and someone asked me well are you going
1:42:33
to support rank control well there's another wrong that doesn't make a right again there's a system in place with
1:42:39
this group that's telling you what you should do out of fear so please again we
1:42:45
have the funds to fix it no matter what they're saying it's it's it's absolutely
1:42:51
above board to do that thank you was done Mis with with mismanagement
1:42:56
throughout the whole process thank you Mr
1:43:07
President oh sorry one second we're still answering the question from Mr gvino um I saw counselor saying then
1:43:13
counselor Collins and I have an answer about the financial task force still I'll be I'll be very brief um there has
1:43:19
been there there's been only one counselor here tonight that's asked asked the voters in the room to vote a certain way and not me it's not a
1:43:27
certain number of other counselors so just putting that but you did but you did no no but
1:43:34
coun one counil counsel I say that we approve these because we that voting yes
1:43:42
two counselors two counselors so two counselors but pay attention I am paying attention you
1:43:48
didn't read the budget but anyways it's embarrassing man this is I I apologize
1:43:54
for letting this get off the track the question was about I I think there's one not your fault there's one there was one
1:44:00
aspect of the question about um the new growth and coming back to ask the vot the voters to ask for yeah um for
1:44:07
another override and I believe the financial task force has been pretty open in saying that we believe that with
1:44:12
new growth coming in we in talking to the developers who are looking to develop on the properties that we're resoning for and looking at the projects
1:44:19
that are coming into our city we believe that we won't need to ask for another um override until the the de exclusion for
1:44:26
that school um that's something that we you know are very open conversations that we have with our planning
1:44:32
department staff with our assessing staff here in the city council chambers and in their offices as well um and you
1:44:39
know to the point of us the the the thear tact of of Us coming back next
1:44:44
year right the only the there is one opportunity offered tonight where we do
1:44:51
come back next year and that's kicking the cand down the road by using free cash this year which would guarantee that we come back that we come back to
1:44:57
this exact same position next year as well thank you councelor saying I think
1:45:03
I got it on the task force um thanks Mr jimo for the
1:45:08
question so when we talk about sufficiency of the override um in the public documents that have been
1:45:14
repeatedly asserted don't exist but are of course public and on the website uh the financial task force has said that
1:45:20
we believe that this override and debt exclusion is sufficient along with whatever needs to
1:45:25
be done for the high school which we all knew always was going to be an independent question to allow the city's
1:45:31
Planning and Development work based on the comprehensive plan and the zoning recodification and ongoing zoning work
1:45:36
to take effect to begin to raise the funds so yes right now in the public documents that have been released I
1:45:42
think both the March document and the June document uh talk about that that
1:45:47
question we believe that not only is this the best pass forward for the city's Financial Health but that the amounts are sufficient that we would not
1:45:53
be coming back in the next 5 to 10 years outside of a Medford High School question uh to address the city's
1:45:58
Financial Health and challenges when it comes to the financial task force question Financial task force was not a
1:46:04
public body did not include for example members of the public appointed citizens Etc was an internal body to City Hall
1:46:11
similar to project meetings in different departments interde departmental groups a designed for uh different uh projects
1:46:19
so that is why it was held internally and not uh in publicly posted meetings and public
1:46:27
meetings I'm going to go to zoom we have deian I you have one minute for a
1:46:34
question name and address for the record please deian andrano 23 Emerald Street
1:46:42
um my question is if these overrides pass where does this money go into does
1:46:50
it go into the general fund then to be dispersed how does that work
1:46:57
and the other thing is Council Callahan there is 351 cities and towns in
1:47:05
Massachusetts not 451 wow it sounds like a I think you
1:47:11
said 451 but it sounds sounds like you got the 51 right so it may have been a misspeak I'm thank you so much for your
1:47:19
correction because I do know it's 351 I'm surpr that I said that but thank
1:47:24
you so much for the question sometimes we just have a little missp all right anyone want to answer
1:47:31
those questions I can get money where the money goes but if anyone else wants to go for
1:47:38
it all right um in terms of where the money goes uh 3 million from question
1:47:43
seven goes to menford public schools to replace 1.7 million in onetime funds
1:47:49
that were used for fiscal 25 to cover positions to address address the uh
1:47:54
inclusion of federally funded pandemic Aid positions and to address maintenance costs 500,000 would go to the DPW to
1:48:03
hire staff to have a permanent on in-house Road and sidewalk repair crew
1:48:08
and four million would go to the school to address a number of issues mainly collectively bargained issues around pay
1:48:14
for teachers par professional staff addressing the issue of the school day
1:48:20
and potentially also addressing issues such as coaches STP s uh and transportation depending on uh what is
1:48:26
prioritized during the next budget process and for question six that is dedicated to a new fire
1:48:33
station if I can Mr President I'll go to councel scar and councelor Callahan two minutes
1:48:43
um it goes into general fund that's the answer it goes into general fund and by law you're supposed
1:48:51
to take the letter of what the questions are and use that use those funding as
1:48:57
closely as you can to that but the questions as they're read are very vague
1:49:02
so it really doesn't mean it's going to go directly to that it could be portions of that or not again I'll bring us back
1:49:09
to the budget meeting when count when school K member Jenny Graham was asked a question if we were given $5 million
1:49:17
would everybody go back to those positions and the answer was yes the next evening the school's financial
1:49:24
director and the school superintendent when I asked that question from the evening before she said absolutely not
1:49:30
the money would go back into their fund and they would distribute it to what they think is best for
1:49:36
them so it's it's a little it's it's not true and I'll give you an example we talk about all these different cuts we
1:49:43
haven't filled we haven't filled I believe now 29 teachers in the methord public schools that's funding we haven't
1:49:50
we paid for we have we have so many dire issues so many the fiscal crisis we've
1:49:55
been hearing but at the same breath we're asking to bring in shiny new programs that are new that are costing
1:50:02
the school department $200,000 we're talking about a city
1:50:08
council that during this financial crisis talked about did what we found $9
1:50:13
million of free cash when they looked at the override and then what happened they voted themselves a raise so the seol
1:50:20
committee now goes from 10,000 to ,000 up to 22 24,000 this the mayor goes gets she gets
1:50:27
an increase three times three different ways so again I implore all of you who are open-minded thinkers are you sure
1:50:34
we're in a fiscal crisis or are we in a problem with this fiscal mismanagement that's what I ask all of two minutes
1:50:40
thank you appreciate councelor Callahan two minutes uh yeah I just wanted to speak to the um the question which is uh
1:50:47
where is the money going to go so my understanding is that in that first year is when that um you know strong
1:50:53
encouragement to spend it on what was mentioned in the it's a legal requirement a legal requirement thank you very much a legal requirement to
1:50:59
spend it on what was uh talked about in the ballot question but um what happens over time because that because prop two
1:51:08
and a half overrides don't end right they they sort of just mean that the total amount of
1:51:14
the budget is increased and that will continue it is a sustainable source of Reven it is a sustainable source of
1:51:20
Revenue uh and what that means is that over time there may be uh you know like
1:51:26
10 years later 15 20 30 years later it may be that that budget needs you know the city council should be able to spend
1:51:33
that budget in the way that makes the most sense um so that's the reason why
1:51:38
it's a legal requirement at the beginning but it does go into the general fund
1:51:44
right yes and specifically it would be appropriated if they were passed there would be an appropriation in the first
1:51:51
year the appropriation would be as outlined in the ballot questions in future years budgets would have to be
1:51:56
cut in order to reappropriate those funds so um and I don't think anyone
1:52:01
behind this rail has ever supported cutting teachers or the school budget that's what
1:52:09
happened we'll go to the podium name and address for the record please you have one minute to ask ask your question uh
1:52:15
Joan consel Magno 55 Gaston Street here in Medford according to the general laws
1:52:21
of massachus suids in regards to proposition 2 and A2 debt exclusions and
1:52:26
overrides enable the community either to permanently increase its Levy limit or
1:52:32
temporarily Levy above its Levy limit or Levy ceiling the two key words here are
1:52:38
permanently or temporarily on question six we have a
1:52:45
noncontingent appropriation this is for the fire headquarters of $2 million per
1:52:51
year in overrides with a bond uh of $30
1:52:56
million um on questions seven and8 my question
1:53:01
is this question six has a bond capacity of $30 million but on everything that I have
1:53:08
read questions seven and eight have the contingency appropriation for questions
1:53:16
seven I believe it's three and a half million uh per year override and for
1:53:21
question eight $4 million per year override but there is no uh uh
1:53:28
contingent appropriation for those two questions seven and eight is there a bond capacity for those two questions
1:53:37
and will there be a graphics or da database de detailing these overrides
1:53:44
much like councilman Bear's just uh presented like the 3 million for the
1:53:49
Medford Public Schools 500,000 for DPW Etc so we know the line items and how
1:53:55
they're being distributed throughout uh the community sure thank you for the
1:54:02
question um I just wanted I can go to other folks but I do have the answer I
1:54:07
think so um in terms of the temporary versus permanent question six is a debt
1:54:12
exclusion so it's it's temporary in the sense that there's the $30 million amount for the bond uh the $2 billion
1:54:19
that you cited is an estimate for the annual debt service cost that estimate was created to try to give folks an
1:54:27
understanding of what that might look like on an annual basis on their tax impact um so that's a temporary until
1:54:32
the bond is paid off for question um questions seven and eight uh those would
1:54:39
be permanent those are overrides intended to be permanent increases to the levy limit to fund ongoing
1:54:45
operations um in terms of the line items I believe there is a page on the city website right now that does outline this
1:54:52
specifics that I just said in terms of the 3 million for the MPS and 500,000
1:54:58
for the DPW in question 7 and the 4 million in question 8 um I can look at
1:55:04
seeing if the city might be able to also add a graphic there but I believe if you go to medfordma.org there's a button
1:55:11
right on the front page that says override information and it does outline
1:55:16
uh the line items for each specific question uh to the greatest extent possible may I just just ask another
1:55:23
question of councilman uh you said Levy limits we don't know what the levy
1:55:29
limits would be on questions seven and eight as yet we so we do it would be 3.5
1:55:34
million for question seven and four million for question eight oh okay yeah and that's the max that's it's there
1:55:41
can't go higher than that and those are not funding any sort of bonds or debt exclusions those are for the override
1:55:48
thank you thank you uh scell if I Council be and question six I think we
1:55:54
have a firefighters uh Union here that have been involved in the negotiation because there is no limit on question
1:56:01
six truly is no limit that's so true no there isn't it's wide open so I know
1:56:06
that if we can maybe have a fire fire fighters that have been working on this
1:56:11
just to give us an idea what the process was the beginning what we were looking at for a number and how how much it's
1:56:18
dropped so we can understand truly if the that's not the format here take public comment at the
1:56:23
end oh okay so I'm sorry uh we hopefully the firefighters can have an opportunity
1:56:30
to express why they want to vote no on on this this debt exclusion because I
1:56:36
think what you asked there is such fluctuation and what's true what they needed and what was agreed upon before
1:56:43
the mayor became very angry with the firefighters and then started cutting and cutting and now we're left with an
1:56:50
inferior product that our men and women firefighter men and women said over and over again that please do not hurt the
1:56:57
residents of this community with an inferious station don't do it wait maybe down the line we could rethink this and
1:57:04
and refocus on what we could do but for now we're saying let's not hurt so here we go we have teachers that are saying
1:57:10
let's not hurt our community you have firefighters say let's not hurt the community the questions you're asking
1:57:16
should have been out there for you Joan years months and months ago so you could truly understand the impact that you're
1:57:21
going to face and again this is where we talk about the lack of transparency and why should be why this should be taken off the
1:57:29
table and people should know vote no because bottom line is the fear of children that should be fixed with the
1:57:35
$3 million from free cash the May said it we have 18.5 we could still take three million out and do that we'll
1:57:41
still have enough to keep our bond rating up and and look to bond other projects or maybe we sit together again
1:57:48
as a true Financial working group a task force and say how do we do this together
1:57:53
as a community so we're not going to look later because there's no guarantees that there won't be another override next year I promise you that every other
1:58:01
community that's gone that way have asked for two and three thank you councel scarpelli um just on the point
1:58:06
about question six Department of Revenue guidelines it can be for the bonded amount uh it's not written into the
1:58:13
question that's because of how the proposition two and a half law is written but it is for the $30 million
1:58:18
plus minor project changes it is not a blank check it is not just an open thing Department of Revenue has extend the
1:58:25
State Department of Revenue has extensive guidelines on this uh so if there are minor project changes or
1:58:30
construction related uh inflation adjustments those could be included but they have to be minor if there's a
1:58:36
significant increase to the budget uh it would have to either be going out for another Bond funded by another Revenue
1:58:42
Source or funded by an additional debt exclusion vote of the people thank you
1:58:47
I'm going to go to zoom we have Christina Roberts Christina you have one minute to answer ask your question name
1:58:54
and address for the record please good evening uh I'm Christina Roberts at 21 Brook Street I just wanted
1:59:01
to take a minute to thank you guys for doing the hard work to get this question before the voters um as you can tell
1:59:08
from the tone of many public meetings and discussions on Facebook it is not an easy thing for a politician to do I'm
1:59:15
coming here tonight as an enthusiastic supporter of these initiatives not because of fear but because I'd like to
1:59:23
live in a city that invests in their Public Schools uh I enjoy relatively low
1:59:29
property tax rates compared to surrounding towns and I would love to
1:59:34
see our teachers get paid at rates that are aligned with our surrounding
1:59:39
communities um I just love to see our town have a flourishing strong public school system so thank you so much do
1:59:46
you have a question no I'm just here to say thanks for doing the hard work and for getting the information into the hands of the
1:59:52
only taking questions but thank you we'll go to the podium name and
1:59:58
address for the record you have a minute to ask your question good evening Claudia fenny 36 faragate Avan I want to
2:00:05
mention that as a taxpayer I cannot vote for these resolutions because the monies
2:00:10
that you're requesting specifically for question number six and eight do not appear to have a plan and after hearing
2:00:18
tonight the concerns Financial budgetary concerns of the council I'd like to ask
2:00:24
how could you possibly present a request from taxpayers on question six when
2:00:30
there is no formal approved fire headquarter plan that specifically
2:00:37
addresses the union concerns because they're the ones that are out there doing the uh fighting on our behalf and
2:00:44
as a citizen we don't want to be under short changed at all because of
2:00:49
oversight um regardless of the um personal matter so my question be to the
2:00:56
council in business this would not even pass or fly you need to present plans if
2:01:04
you had presented tonight a plan for an approved fire headquarters that everyone
2:01:11
was said this is going to meet our needs then I could say I would vote for number six but right I mean yes number six but 
2:01:18
I cannot do that because I'm not convinced that you are giving us the
2:01:24
necessary information or are even approving of a fire headquarters that's
2:01:29
going to be something that will meet our needs in five years thank you for the question we'll go to members of the
2:01:35
council Council Laro two minutes um I I would uh offer that another counselor
2:01:43
might be better equipped to answer the question about the way that debt exclusions are structured legally the um
2:01:49
ramifications of um how you estimate the dollar amount that it's going to cost but I will say that the firehouse is uh
2:01:57
property of the city which means it's owned by the residents of Medford not the firefighters so even if the union is
2:02:06
not uh in agreement with the mayor the property is owned by the city and if
2:02:12
it's not in good working order and we need to maintain the building it's
2:02:17
important that the building be maintained thank you counc Ling two
2:02:22
minutes thank you uh so I would like to point out that in asking for specifics
2:02:29
for these things there is a bit of a kind of a circular logic that goes in because if hypothetically we were to put
2:02:35
forward to the voters the exact pay scale of each teacher and each line item
2:02:40
that's not really possible because Union contracts haven't actually been negotiated haven't been negotiated yet
2:02:46
so that would be premature um this this this wasn't regarding the cont no no no
2:02:52
no I'm just I'm just getting there if we could just maintain decorum thank you okay and so I mean it go it goes for it
2:02:58
goes for it goes for a lot of things it goes for um the development of the plans for a fire station as well so you don't
2:03:05
have to have the plans um completely finalized and approved but you can't
2:03:10
have a estimate for the full cost of the station from the people that are developing the plans beforehand right
2:03:17
now that estimate is $30 million um and it goes I mean it goes
2:03:23
for the salaries as well so you know we are we put in the ballot questions the
2:03:29
areas where it would go to but we can't say it will go to 10 teachers it will go to 15 parents Etc because those need to
2:03:36
be negotiated after the fact on the other hand if on the other hand if we do I've heard I've also heard people say
2:03:43
okay how can you promise uh higher wages for instance if those contracts haven't been negotiated so this becomes a bit of
2:03:49
a chicken and egg problem when asking for uh specifics versus not being specific enough on these ballot
2:03:55
questions that's I just like to make that General point so thank you I I I didn't hear the question answered about
2:04:02
the proposed building design but you mentioned salaries and I do agree
2:04:08
salaries have to be met thank you we're going to councelor say I I'll be very brief um it's in state procurement law
2:04:15
and I I believe that this is the process moving forward that we you know we can plan with certain threshold but then
2:04:21
then we need to find the source of Revenue that we have to pay for that project before we move on that much
2:04:27
further and so that's where we are in the process is we're at this uh at the step in the process where we're
2:04:32
identifying that source of revenue for the project moving on so it's premature thank you um I mean I can answer the
2:04:39
question more specifically or vice president Collins but um if you don't mind mine is on a different part of the
2:04:44
question is what mine is related to a different part of the question okay on the specific question when we were
2:04:51
looking at the Financial State of the city we said what is the biggest Capital obligation that the city is going to
2:04:56
have over the next 5 to 10 years other than a high school which we've excluded from everyone acknowledges is such a big
2:05:03
project needs to be handled on its own it was a new fire headquarters uh we can get into the back and forth dispute over
2:05:10
should there have been a combined headquarters should this have been 10 10 years ago those quite frankly were decisions that were made before I was
2:05:16
even even thinking about running for office um when we looked at that we said
2:05:21
that's the biggest expense if we ask the voters to do that as a debt exclusion it means that Bond capacity is available
2:05:27
for many of the other things that we've talked about now we looked at that there has
2:05:32
been an owner's project manager hired by the mayor the mayor has controlled the design process has included my
2:05:39
understanding Chiefs has not included the union or firefighters to the level that they've wanted to be included um
2:05:45
and has never included this Council in the design process we're not part of the design process for the fire station we
2:05:50
made a decision based on the financial health of the community based on the estimates provided by the designer the
2:05:56
mayor and the fire chief that a $30 million fire station is what they think will need to be built the design is not
2:06:02
finalized uh my understanding is that changes can and are being made um but to
2:06:10
us it was a separate question the design process uh is not something that this Council has been involved in um but the
2:06:16
Financial Health and of the community is obviously something that we work on during the budget process and so
2:06:22
identifying this project as what should be funded by a debt exclusion was uh how
2:06:28
we made that decision thank you thank you vice president Collins two minutes thank you and just quickly to follow up
2:06:34
on that I'll note that um again to Echo what president bear said it's not it's not within the purview of this Council
2:06:40
to um have any input on the design of the fire headquarters but I will note for folks who might be interested um on
2:06:46
the city website under the fire department web page there are um links to six of the concept plans that were
2:06:52
published this year which I think are is interesting for folks for residents who want a little bit more detail because it actually enumerates what's different in
2:07:00
each design from the one preceding it thank you Mr President Council prob
2:07:08
two minutes isn't isn't this a a total microcosm of what we're saying this is what six seven8 are about
2:07:15
there's so much confusion first of all we have to understand the feasibility study that
2:07:21
was done done is what gets us the funding for through procurement so we know the numbers what my fellow Council
2:07:28
said that this is a city building and firefighters I don't know what the comment was that is so irresponsible to
2:07:34
understand that this fire this fire department is going to stand up and say no we don't want a new headquarters
2:07:40
because it's insufficient and it will hurt our community funding wise when we
2:07:45
say the needs of the community we mean proper safe Staffing and department and ability to add technical rescue special
2:07:52
services to our emergency response which will bring better services to the citizens in every call that's wrong what
2:07:58
they're asking for they're asking for our fire stations adequate to help our community
2:08:03
grow the proposed design does not adequately address the health and safety issues of the fire service regarding
2:08:10
cancer exposure mitigations the privacy concerns which have never been addressed properly by our department adults
2:08:17
deserve privacy regardless of the gender this isn't this isn't an issue which is female men do you understand the design
2:08:24
that was presented has firefighters after a fire showering downstairs walking upstairs in a towel or a
2:08:32
bathrobe walking down a community hallway to get to their quarters by the way their quarters did not consist of a
2:08:39
locker room this is what we're saying these are issues that I can't even believe that we
2:08:45
would entertain this with so many questions this is how six seven and eight were all done they were all done
2:08:51
in in in a bubble that we're were're were're supposedly battled over on social media by a leader of our
2:08:58
community we have the fire former fire chief here we have the leaders of our fire State Fire Department that have
2:09:03
openly said we don't want to hurt our citizenry and and putting 30 million let
2:09:09
alone $3 into this because we don't know what we need thank you councelor
2:09:14
scarpelly anyone else on this question all right uh we'll go
2:09:23
to I'm a little wary uh bill on Zoom if you could provide a last name or a last initial uh we'll go to the podium uh
2:09:30
Damon address record do you have a minute to ask your question Richard Orlando Winford
2:09:36
way council president here's my question in my minute before I get to that I want
2:09:42
to comment on a statement you made about the project school project maybe not being done correctly and then a more
2:09:49
egregious comment from the council my right that that work was done in a shoddy manner that project called
2:09:56
building the future was identified as the premier project for schools in the
2:10:03
Commonwealth 20 years ago and I can speak wholeheartedly from the professionalism of the citizens and
2:10:11
professionals that put that together so I'm very disappointed to hear those kinds of comments uh thanks I mean I
2:10:18
will give you I wasn't expecting you to go around the rules here my point was not that the people involved did a bad
2:10:24
job my point was clearly this was an issue that was missed and there was a comment made by someone very involved in
2:10:30
those projects at a political event quote we made money and I think that that's just
2:10:37
something that should be entertained as maybe also maybe not representing the work or the goals of that
2:10:43
committee thank you so you can have your question I would just ask if anybody on this committee or any of these
2:10:49
transparent committees want to one to stand citizen engagement sit down with the few with the building the future
2:10:55
committee sat down with some people who are on the committee thank you I I would question that okay thank you very much
2:11:01
my question you have a minute to ask your question Mr the claim is that these overrides are for the children and
2:11:07
teachers the school superintendent stated at a city council meeting that if the override passes These funds would
2:11:14
not necessarily be used to secure the teacher positions I was at that meeting
2:11:19
and heard that statement recently the use of the funds has been changing we are now hearing that busting costs will
2:11:26
be included it seems very unlikely that the funds will make it into the
2:11:31
children's classrooms the far the children argument is more sounding like an emotional
2:11:38
distraction what are the assurances that Medford children will actually benefit from these
2:11:44
overruns thank you sure anyone want to go for that two minutes Council vice
2:11:49
president Collins thank you for the the question um again as a city council member not involved in the school's
2:11:55
Department budgeting process but I would just say considering these
2:12:02
questions thinking about the motives behind them um in terms of the motives
2:12:07
for community and the motives politically for putting these forward um it's hard for me to imagine even putting
2:12:14
on my cynical hat what our gain could possibly be in putting
2:12:19
forward a question that asks residents to pay more in taxes um to then spend it
2:12:25
on spous things in the schools department when we know because we hear from residents all the time all year
2:12:31
long in school department Mee in school committee meetings and in City Council meetings um the adverse effects on
2:12:37
students and teachers and staff because of underfunding um and the ways that we
2:12:42
want to see the school experience be better for students um that we can't yet afford it's it's hard we have no
2:12:50
motivation to raise this money and then spend it on things that are not the things that the
2:12:56
community has already been in some cases really begging City leadership to spend it on um again I'm I'm not involved in
2:13:05
the weeds of the schools Department budgeting process the way that the school committee is and the way that the schools department is but um there is it
2:13:13
it's just impossible for me to announ in a scenario where this money will be spent
2:13:19
on 30 seconds seconds thank you um the goal of doing this very difficult
2:13:26
thing which indeed is causing a lot of difficult conversations in the community is to improve life for Medford Public
2:13:32
School students life and conditions for Medford residents um it would
2:13:39
be 10 seconds it would be bizarre for us to spend it away on spous things that
2:13:44
weren't directly related to improving quality of life for residents and students in the classroom
2:13:51
thank you we're not going back and forth anyone else want to go on this question Council
2:13:57
Lazaro um I used to work for the superintendent of schools uh Dr Edward
2:14:02
Vincent and um I believe I've never worked for somebody
2:14:08
who has had uh so much integrity and led from such a place of integrity and um I
2:14:13
believe that she when she answered councelor scarelli who I think asked her that question a number of times over and
2:14:19
over again in order try to get her to um say something off or make a mistake but
2:14:27
she was she uh she uh was trying to um
2:14:32
not lie and what she doesn't want to do is be caught up in uh having to make a
2:14:39
decision that doesn't put the uh best scenario for the students first so I um
2:14:48
my guess is that that was where that was coming from from um that also that things shift in schools all the time
2:14:54
people leave districts for various reasons if you can't reinforce or if you can't reappoint somebody to something
2:15:00
because they got another job these things happen all the time you can't always put somebody back in a position because they've they've gotten another
2:15:07
position somewhere else it's not always possible um I think that was I think she was trying to be truthful to the best of
2:15:12
proability um the other thing I will say is I'm sorry to have hurt anybody's feelings but I really did not appreciate
2:15:20
getting an email saying that the fixtures inside the school um caused there to be lead in the water I am not
2:15:26
saying it as it was somebody else's fault but my kids go to school there there's lead in the
2:15:33
water thank you that's the facts thank you yes we we could talk
2:15:41
about water sewer infrastructure for another couple hours if we want um it's a big problem anyone else have a answer
2:15:48
to Mr linder's Question sure councelor scarpello minutes so I appreciate my fellow counselor being in my mind to
2:15:55
understand what my plan was was to get the superintendent to say something she
2:16:01
didn't want to say it's again I appreciate the the resident who put all
2:16:06
of the all of the meetings out on social media because you could say whatever you want
2:16:13
about George Scott Pell you could say you could say that he's a liar but when there's there video and documentations
2:16:18
with it simple question to the superintendent was will this money will it be made whole like counselor school
2:16:25
committee woman gr mentioned her simple answer was no I wasn't trying to have her say anything any different and as a
2:16:32
matter of fact what we're seeing in the school system after that vote there were many teaches in many programs that were
2:16:39
dismissed and cut we had the band leader who left right away because they were promised things we had we had I believe
2:16:45
a $200,000 line put in place for cityia which is a great program it's a great
2:16:50
program but when you have so many fiscal crisis in the city why are we funding something that's just a shiny nickel
2:16:57
right now there are so many issues with this my friends and I just I I employ you just to listen to The Common Sense
2:17:04
listen to the understanding that you can use free cash as a former teacher and a
2:17:09
parent of public school kids and a coach I understand I lived it I live the
2:17:16
process but I also understand and how to move forward without hurting our whole
2:17:22
Community or without dividing our whole Community because this is what we're doing these override questions are
2:17:28
hurting our community we don't have the information that's out there it's not spelled out
2:17:34
correctly we don't truly know although like Council Callan said yeah it goes to the general fund we don't know where
2:17:40
that money is going so we have teachers positions open with money in there remember there's a
2:17:47
lot of money that hasn't been used till date that we can still use but thank you you thank
2:17:52
you councilor calan two minutes um sure I think um it's important to understand
2:17:58
that the money from both seven and eight will go to the schools the obviously not
2:18:03
the 500,000 for the roads but uh the rest of it and um that it is the job of
2:18:09
the school committee with the mayor and with the school superintendent and the financial people and the whole you know
2:18:15
administration of the schools um to figure out how best to serve serve
2:18:21
children with that budget um it's possible that a tiny percentage of that
2:18:29
may be necessary to um boost our busing so that kids young kids are not walking
2:18:35
across dangerous intersections and I'm not going to be making that decision
2:18:41
that's simply a tiny example since people have mentioned busing um there
2:18:46
are a zillion different decisions that can be made when you're talking about the school budget um and it's the job of
2:18:54
that part of the electeds and administration the school uh committee as well as the uh administration of the
2:18:59
school system to uh make the best decisions each year given what is
2:19:05
happening that year uh with the budget that they have and of course as always
2:19:11
with the best interests of the students in mind thank
2:19:18
you just to get specific when we talk about the needs in the classroom 85% of the school budget is salaries and staff
2:19:26
15% is non-salary and staff expenses likely the vast majority of both of
2:19:31
these questions through collective bargaining will end up going to either hiring more staff or paying existing staff more um the specifics outlined in
2:19:39
the fiscal 25 budget process by the schools are eight classroom teachers
2:19:44
five par professionals uh two literacy interventionists two behavioral specialists I think those are all
2:19:50
significant imp on the students in the room uh a nurse uh a school
2:19:55
administrative assistant at the mlin which right now is operating with one Administrative Assistant instead of two for a complex of over a thousand kids um
2:20:02
we could say those aren't in the classroom but I think we know those would help in the classroom and help kids as well um so those are the real
2:20:07
life impacts of what this would go to fund never mind the idea of paying par
2:20:13
professionals a living wage um hiring more staff to reduce class sizes or other things that would be possible
2:20:18
through the collective bargaining process with the teachers union and the prayer professionals
2:20:24
Union we'll go to uh Zoom we have Bill O'Brien name and address for the record
2:20:31
you have a minute to ask your question uh Bill O'Brien 194 Central lab yeah I have a couple questions and a couple
2:20:37
comments um first of all there's nothing wrong with a low tax rate I don't understand why politicians think we
2:20:42
always should be paying more that's number one number two on a counselor comment um this $30 million doesn't
2:20:50
contain any firefighter salary the firefighters negotiated a salary and settled it way back in October just like
2:20:56
the teachers negotiated a salary way back in October so I don't understand
2:21:02
why the city council would pass a budget if these salaries in these negotiations
2:21:07
that were bargained in good faith by the unions in the city if you couldn't fund them then why did you pass a
2:21:15
budget that's one question my other question is why where do the teachers feel about this is there any I haven't
2:21:21
seen any teachers commented about how they feel about this issue thank
2:21:27
you thank you anyone have questions or answers on
2:21:32
that councelor lemming two minutes well just uh just to make the point that um
2:21:39
if you have a um you know we this is a request to pay slightly more in property
2:21:45
taxes but it also goes along with the general point of yeah $37 a month that's that is slightly
2:21:51
um you know with the that go along with the general point
2:21:57
of you get what you pay for again we are a very underfunded city um and we would
2:22:05
like that to not be the case and this is a step in the right direction that's
2:22:12
all thank you anyone else sure Mr President if I canell two minutes this
2:22:17
again we went over this again just to reiterate to people that are new to the room $37 that's all it is coming from
2:22:24
people that truly don't understand the impact because a lot of people here imagine just $37 a month how what that
2:22:30
would do to people sitting in here imagine the impact because that's been overlooked but it's not 37 we talked
2:22:37
about the CPA increase we talked about the assessment we talked about the excise tax it's everything it's not 37
2:22:44
the dialogue of fear spins it easily now again I'm going to say this the dialogue
2:22:50
a fear we we talked about busing now lead in the water teacher cuts roads and
2:22:56
sidewalks because $500,000 is going to fix Road sidewalks but the most important thing I want to talk about is
2:23:02
what's happening in our community because if you watch what's happening in in in in social
2:23:08
media the teachers union the MTA has never ever as one person who was a
2:23:14
negotiating team and a former member has never ever ruled on or endorsed a candidate or
2:23:22
a question because we knew as a union members that our impact's not going to
2:23:28
hurt just it's not going to help us but it's going to hurt other unions so they did the right thing by staying
2:23:34
neutral and maybe they believe in it maybe they don't but they said let's be let's stay neutral and shame on this
2:23:40
community that have turned their backs on teachers saying the co comments I've been seeing like this is the teacher's
2:23:47
fault this isn't the teacher's fault this is the administration's fault to set up this feir tactic and set up this
2:23:54
negativity to divide us it's dividing our community listen I want everything we
2:24:01
can get for our children I want everything we need for our students and and parents I want everything we need
2:24:06
for our firefighters and there's options with new growth as we come down the line but
2:24:13
we can correct it right now without hurting renters landlords senior citizens our people that are most
2:24:18
vulnerable we can use that free cash make it whole and move
2:24:23
forward so I implore you please think about what you what you've been hearing
2:24:29
it's concrete Common Sense thank you information so thank you thank
2:24:34
you um vice president Collins two
2:24:40
minutes thank you um obviously there's been a lot said in this Q&A forum and I just I just think
2:24:47
that with everything else that we've been hearing I also want to put on the record that um talk about the costs if
2:24:54
the overrides should pass the assessor gave a great presentation earlier about
2:25:00
how uh costs will go up regardless how costs will go up if seven passes how
2:25:05
costs will go up if both pass Etc um and that's significant I think that is significant I think that people should
2:25:11
take it seriously and decide how they feel about it and if they think that they can afford it and what if any exemptions apply to them and how those
2:25:17
will work with them and call the assessor if they have questions I also think that um what also deserves a
2:25:23
serious and honest discussion is how it how households and individuals end up
2:25:29
paying out of pocket if we don't if we continue to not fund our public sector if we continue to let our roads and
2:25:35
sidewalks get worse and worse and worse which is something to be taken seriously it is a safety issue it is an
2:25:41
accessibility issue if we continue to let our schools get worse and Miss keep missing every opportunity to make them
2:25:48
get better [Music] um I think it is
2:25:55
frankly condescending to build this discussion as nothing more than trying
2:26:00
to scare people into voting a certain way for the people who think wow what if
2:26:07
the schools are no longer an environment where my student can learn or Thrive I cannot pay for a tutor I cannot pay for
2:26:14
private school tuition I am concerned we should not be belittling
2:26:19
that emotion we should not be belittling people who are having to pay out of pocket every year for car repairs
2:26:25
because we can't take care of the most basic thing in our city in a way that um
2:26:31
makes it not quite so obvious when you drive from Winchester into
2:26:36
Medford the format of this discussion was supposed to be a Q&A session where residents could ask questions and
2:26:42
counselors could give answer to the best of their ability I am pretty disappointed that it's turned into an event where certain counselors are
2:26:49
telling res not how they should vote but how they should feel thank you councelor
2:26:54
Collins thank
2:27:00
you number one I appreciate your comments councelor Collins number two I want to say very clearly to the question
2:27:07
why did we pass the budget when I'm talking about um someone have their phone on someone
2:27:14
watching in the room if you could take that out of the room please
2:27:21
well you gota just don't want to have it backlogging in the thank
2:27:26
you um just to be clear to answer the question when we're talking about collective bargaining agreements we're
2:27:32
talking about future contracts not current contracts as was noted that it's not recommended by I think counselors
2:27:39
who disagree on the substance it's not recommended to use free cash for operating budget issues certainly is not
2:27:44
recommended to use free cash to negotiate contracts so um we're talking
2:27:50
about the capacity of the city to negotiate future contracts I think that was the question uh asked by Mr
2:27:57
O'Brien we'll go to the podium uh name and address the record you have one minute to ask your question Patricia
2:28:03
Chappell 53 Garfield um so the one of the comments was last to the table and I would say
2:28:09
that's about right for Medford because nowhere did we apply for any Road Grants which the federal government granted to
2:28:17
Everett they granted it to Somerville and Springfield got $15 million in Road
2:28:23
Grants so what are we doing about that grants for the water and soore are up and available now what are we doing
2:28:28
about that yet we're told oh you have to come up with the 200 million for that $9 million sat in a checking account in the
2:28:37
highest interest rate times in something conservative with a decent interest rate
2:28:43
you lost us $450,000 in one year's time how long and two years you tell me so so we still
2:28:50
haven't learned our lesson because I chased down Ted to say why am I on the DLS website and it's showing me
2:28:57
something different for the rate that our taxes would be coming up and he said oh you added in the fire station I said
2:29:05
well of course I did that's coming up next year so people need to plan so again we haven't planned like we should
2:29:12
three years five years we're just looking one year ahead what do we need for one year when the fact is people who
2:29:19
live on budgets actually do have to plan three and five years ahead thank you so
2:29:24
I by about 20 seconds we can only do expenses we can afford but we can do an
2:29:30
electric street sweeper so my question to you is why would I trust this
2:29:36
Administration with another dime of my money thank you for your [Applause]
2:29:44
question anyone want to take it councelor C
2:29:50
two minutes um that's a tough question to answer I I I simply want to say that
2:29:56
um chronic underfunding unfortunately causes people to mistrust their government so you know
2:30:04
half of our roads are in the worst two road conditions and that's from chronic
2:30:10
underfunding um it costs between 30 and 50 times as much to fix a road in
2:30:16
condition five that's the worst one as it does to fix Road in condition two uh
2:30:22
and you know we would be able to pay every year for all of our roads to get
2:30:27
repaired um with chapter 90 funding if we never let them fall into that kind of
2:30:32
disrepair but through underfunding chronic decades long underfunding we have created a city that
2:30:40
cannot service basic basic needs and that does make people mistrust the
2:30:45
government unfortunately but the the fix is and someone here mentioned you know
2:30:51
that what Norm what other communities do when they're in these situations is bonds and other things I think that what
2:30:57
other communities do in this situation is they pass a prop to and half override thank you thank you councelor
2:31:03
Callahan all right please stop interrupting the proceedings thank you councelor leming two
2:31:10
minutes um sorry where is the woman who asked the question I don't know it looks
2:31:15
like she left oh sorry all right good okay sorry um no I just wanted to point out so
2:31:22
there was so I've seen this um error that people have been doing with the um DLS calculator the past um like the past
2:31:30
week or so where they're taking the $7.5 million that comes from questions seven and eight combined and then they're just
2:31:38
adding that to the $30 million and then saying I think so she just added the two million for the estimated yeah that is
2:31:45
actually
2:32:00
[Music]
2:32:19
talking with the assessor's office um their estimate is that given declining
2:32:25
in interest rates for municipal bonds given the contingency already in the project and um also uh the DLS sorry do
2:32:34
State Department of Revenue guidelines around debt exclusions that it would essentially stay around the $30 million
2:32:40
total cost for the debt service for the bond
2:32:46
yeah yeah but the interest rate would be set when the debt is issued um we'll go
2:32:53
to zoom Sharon Dio oh sorry you want to go sorry I didn't
2:33:00
see your hand go ahead counselor scar you have to wait a minute I think that um I I what counselor to clarify a
2:33:08
little something I think that what I've heard from residents is The Chronic misrepresentation and the
2:33:16
lack of true transparency is what causes the community to distrust that's what
2:33:23
we're seeing right now that's truly what we're seeing right now when you hear and see how we got to the how we got to this
2:33:31
point this is what caused it it's not the the misinformation the
2:33:37
confusion the uncertainty for the people that are most vulnerable our children
2:33:42
our seniors that's the issue that we should
2:33:47
be focusing on and thinking that override is the answer or ready for this
2:33:52
one $500,000 are going to fix our streets come on I don't think anyone's saying
2:33:58
that so let's let's look at I've heard that 20 times tonight that $500,000 going to fix our streets let's look at
2:34:04
the big picture what's happening DPW the mayor is firing DPW workers hand
2:34:11
over fist we have equipment at DPW that we have we have members that haven't
2:34:16
been trained because they don't ought to they don't ought to train be trained on new equipment we have a mayor that's
2:34:22
that's spending so much money on legal fees and and and legal um settlements
2:34:29
we're in we're in we're using we're using the mismanagement of funds in this community has hurt us to point that here
2:34:35
we are that some councils saying hey since we haven't done it ever let's do it which is
2:34:42
wrong so again I'd love to see us do this the right way fund the schools with free
2:34:49
cash let's go to the table and see what we truly need with a true Financial team
2:34:55
open to the public that it's shared with everybody's input thank
2:35:03
you we got a Sharon or vice president Collins thank you I'll be quick just
2:35:09
just a quick point of information because I know it's been said a few times tonight that the $500,000 would
2:35:14
quote fix the roads I think that as the uh published pavement pavement agement
2:35:20
plan on the city website uh establishes that we have $200 million in a backlog of Road repairs in the city I think
2:35:25
we're all very aware that half a million dollars is not going to fix the roads as
2:35:30
it says in the text of the question what this would do is enable the DPW to establish um as it reads additional
2:35:37
staff for Road and sidewalk infrastructure repair which relates to the uh in-house hot top crew that councelor scarpelli has been advocating
2:35:43
for for years so counselor I'm sad to hear that you've reversed your position on that thank you we'll go to zoom Sharon
2:35:52
DSO you have one minute name and address for the record please please ask your one question Sharon Indo Circuit Road in
2:36:00
massav in Medford longtime resident good evening everyone um I'm sorry that this time is
2:36:08
being heeded to tonight so close to the election that all of these um topics are
2:36:15
being addressed um I don't think anyone even in the audience is like well I agree with her I agree with him I I
2:36:22
heard much it's not kind of happening like that I have neighbors who have children in school and they were asking
2:36:28
me about it because they don't understand it one of my neighbors didn't even know it was going to be on the table so um I think um on the grounds of
2:36:37
timing Mrs shopi thank you very much um I'm not faving one councilman over the other but it seems to be that you
2:36:44
followed you have a question Sharon you have 10 seconds yes yes I do yes I do that youve been follow following a time
2:36:51
um frame on this yes we were kind of shocked during the time that you were
2:36:57
you know knew about some of these things you know coming about is this is the
2:37:02
only answer that you could come up with what do other communities do Mr
2:37:07
President or Mr Shelli what have they turned to for Alternatives this is not
2:37:12
acceptable especially in Medford because we haven't had one in 44 years thank you
2:37:21
I'm just following the rules guys I think everyone needs to take a deep breath before
2:37:30
groaning anyone want to go councelor scarelli anybody I didn't
2:37:36
understand her I didn't hear a question her question was uh what were the Alternatives uh that could have been
2:37:42
found that are not the overrides and dead exclusions well it's very simple I'll
2:37:47
say it again I think that when we sat and talked at the meeting in April May and June I came forth with a proposal of
2:37:56
a resolution of using free cash of that um of the 24 million $25 million that we
2:38:02
had and I believe it was counselor when I brought it forth it was Council lemming that used uh Rule 21 which froze
2:38:10
the future discussions of that proposal um and then as it as it went through and
2:38:16
you could see in the videos as we went through that process they kept using tactics where we couldn't speak or have
2:38:23
open forums before we went to a vote in the budget so again these are issues
2:38:28
that when I when I say that's what we need to eliminate we need to sit together as a community and
2:38:34
say okay what do we work with the state and work with our assessor and say hey let's understand the impact at an early
2:38:40
enough stage so we can we can be prepared for that let's see if we can look at true exemptions that would help
2:38:47
our landlords or senior citizens or our most vulnerable community members then
2:38:52
let's look at and say what do we really need and make sure that our children in our schools have everything that they're
2:38:58
asking for so I I think that with that process being open I I I don't think how
2:39:04
we wouldn't be able to deny anything but the way the process has come out and the
2:39:09
way that's been spun saying C Scott ping wants no because he doesn't want that that's not true the truth of the matter
2:39:15
is the way this process has gone about from 2023 in June till today has been a
2:39:22
total farce it's been it's been a nightmare it's been it's been disingenuine and this Council can say
2:39:28
what they want these Fair tactics are out there you've you heard them I'm not making it up you've heard them all say
2:39:33
it whether it's lead whether it's whether it's whether it's uh streets falling in I mean even the mayor said
2:39:39
the other day was sitting on a $200 million time bomb called our water system yeah well if we did our job with
2:39:47
arpa that's what that money was made for not to save your ker because you had no
2:39:52
new growth this is why we're here thank
2:39:57
you councelor leming two minutes so first just to make the point that disagreeing uh doesn't mean it's a fear
2:40:05
tactic just means I disagree with you um just want to put that out there uh the actual answer to that is there's is that
2:40:12
the communities that haven't had to do prop two and a half um overrides to keep
2:40:17
a level budget did it um are either the communities that have um just much
2:40:23
bigger budgets overall than we do like Boston or in cases like Cambridge they
2:40:29
invested in areas like Kendall Square uh years and years ago um Medford uh could
2:40:35
have invested in that um kind of development a long time ago we just never did that and smaller communities
2:40:42
that don't really have the opportunity to do that sort of uh commercial development some towns are basically
2:40:48
just um Residential Properties and not a whole lot of commercial activity they have to
2:40:53
do these sorts of overrides regularly so Medford um kind of avoided this by just
2:40:59
doing cuts and cuts and cuts until we became very underfunded community and now that we're at this point um there's
2:41:07
really not much of a choice except for either kicking the can down the road more which doesn't solve the problem or
2:41:14
doing one of these over rides like our neighbors uh or we could uh get a Time machine and do a lot more commercial
2:41:21
development but of course that's not an option thank you thank you anyone else on these
2:41:30
question councel Callahan counc say Okay um just to be brief uh you know
2:41:40
we have had for the last three years the best three years of new growth in the city in the last 25 years those are just
2:41:47
again the facts they're on the DLS web page we can't disagree with data and
2:41:52
Mathematics data and Mathematics are not fear tactics they are just the facts um
2:41:58
Alternatives there was no way in the short to medium term to raise reliable
2:42:04
recurring sustainable Revenue to fund operating budget expenses except for asking the voters to fund those expenses
2:42:11
through an override the property tax levy is the vast majority of the money that the city brings in the state is not
2:42:17
providing the city with significant new Aid the city departments go above and beyond finding federal and state grants
2:42:23
they are looking far and wide for them um just because we don't receive them doesn't mean we didn't apply for them um
2:42:30
and to be honest a lot of the formulas and ways that those things are decided are not favoring places like menford um
2:42:36
because the state school formula looks at our city and they say oh they should pay more in property taxes we're not
2:42:42
going to send them more state aid that's literally how the formula is written it's based on capacity for a city to do
2:42:47
so so when we are 93rd out of 97 for property tax revenue and we are 94th out of 97 for per capita
2:42:55
spending we are where we are the state judges US based on that reality and says we're not giving them more
2:43:01
money so again we came together uh over dozens of public
2:43:08
meetings over three budget Cycles addressing needs of the city and the school department and said this is the best way to raise sustainable recurring
2:43:15
Revenue to fund City operating budget expenses we believe this is the best path forward in the short to medium term
2:43:21
and we're going to ask the voters to make that decision the voters are the voters are going to vote we'll see what
2:43:26
happens I certainly hope that they vote one way other counselors may vote hope that they vote another way but I don't
2:43:33
envy anyone in any I don't think any of us are going to be excited to uh do the
2:43:39
budget If These funds are not available we'll go to the podium name
2:43:44
and address record you have one minute to ask your question name and address meet mayor 373 Riverside at I'm a parent
2:43:49
of two my little guys are at home and I'm here instead with you so for anyone in the home Gamers attacking me well I'm
2:43:56
a white guy with Asian kids let's play identity politics so Council leming
2:44:04
unsad go look it up is that what you would report to someone if someone offered you a contract and said this is
2:44:10
how much it's going to cost me please address your questions through the chair sure please one question un because
2:44:16
that's not what a contractor would do can I have 10 seconds back for years thanks um no wonderful so that said
2:44:24
question six is about the fire station $30 million I think is the estimate there's a lot of unclarity and we could
2:44:30
publish the facts in your assumptions interest rate bond period Cambridge overran three times their fire station
2:44:37
was 25 million in 2019 it's now 77 you're going to knock down this Firehouse then what what's your
2:44:44
contingency plan when the costs go up how many times you going go back to the well and what what are you going to do
2:44:49
in the meantime when there's no Firehouse thank you Mr Merritt um anyone want to go for that
2:44:55
one I have some answers on the Cambridge fire station why it's not a good comparison but go to vice president
2:45:01
Collins no I mean if if you have more detail to add on the Cambridge fire station example that we covered this
2:45:07
question earlier in the the Cambridge fire station was a historic uh renovation of a historic 125y old fire
2:45:15
station they were installing geothermal energy um it's just completely
2:45:20
uncomparable to the project that we're talking about in Medford Square um which is a knockdown again the cost overruns
2:45:27
were mainly due to Historic preservation issues and projects that they were trying to add in there that are not
2:45:32
things that we're trying to add to our station anyone else on the
2:45:38
question see done we'll go to zoom we have Micah kesselman Micah you have one minute name and address for the record
2:45:44
please please ask one question all right well thanks yeah Klan
2:45:49
I'm at 499 Main Street um guys at at the end of the day we are one of the most
2:45:57
underfunded per capita municipalities in the state we
2:46:02
money doesn't just freaking appear out of someone's ass we have to get it somehow the way we get it is sorry the
2:46:10
way we get it is via taxation it's the sustainable way to
2:46:17
produce revenues that could be spent by the municipality for the things that we need to have a happy and nice city to
2:46:24
live in so when people keep talking about this um free cash I would like
2:46:29
some explanation about I'm asking a question about where how are you
2:46:34
planning on making this free cash solution a sustainable ongoing method to
2:46:41
solve our budgeting issue given that we are such an underfunded municipality thank you
2:46:48
uh anyone want to go for that councelor scarpelli counselor
2:46:55
councelor leming 2 minutes I mean I think we've already gone over the free cash issue quite a bit I think the
2:47:00
question was specifically how would Free Cash become a sustainable solution for ongoing operating expenses it it
2:47:06
wouldn't um that's that's that's the that's the answer we used $1.75 million
2:47:11
in free cash to plug the budget um with the understanding that we would have an override um coming up on the B it um I
2:47:20
think what my colleague is saying is that we should do that another year and then do an override the next year so um
2:47:28
but it's I I I'm I'm honestly a bit confused why it keeps coming up as a
2:47:34
solution to all of our problems because it's not like you just can't use free cash year after year for salaries that's
2:47:41
not the way it works so thank you Mr President thank you councelor scarelli
2:47:46
question is how would free cash be a sustainable solution let let let me say it again two minutes this Council has
2:47:52
not said once that we should use free cash year after year what I said right
2:47:57
now is eliminate the fear for our senior citizens our children our teachers for
2:48:03
one time to level fund this and look at other options that's what I said I don't know where where this keeps coming back
2:48:10
and forth and understand an override it was said by another Financial director in another Community
2:48:16
said to me George remember using an override to do what you're doing you're trying to do in Medford it's like using
2:48:21
your credit card to pay for your mortgage or pay for your rent it's just not it's not feasible it's not it's not
2:48:27
a right way to go through the process we look at the different situations and we talk about and we said okay you know
2:48:34
Medford has drastically underfunded so so many processes when you look at um
2:48:40
our receipts we're seeing that right now we see that that you know our circuit
2:48:46
breaker um is increased we seen that we use the fair Amendment Amendment act um
2:48:52
for Chapter 70 our increase to $4 million there is a lot that's out there
2:48:58
there's a lot of money in the city that we're not using correctly we
2:49:04
have seen it over and over again we've talked about just just to have the fact that you have $9 million of free cash at
2:49:10
the end of the year your budget season to get certified that just speaks
2:49:15
volumes of mismanagement of fiscal funds remember when you sit there and you set
2:49:21
that budget that budget is set let's say a 100 million and then you only spend 90
2:49:29
million that means you didn't do something right that means you didn't use that money appropriately it's the
2:49:36
city's it's the city's taxpayers money so when I say free cash of course it's
2:49:42
not free it's our money that we've already paid the year before to balance
2:49:47
our budget to make our city run thank
2:49:55
you anyone else on this question see n Go to the podium um is it
2:50:03
Simon all right Simon you might have to bend the microphone down a little
2:50:09
bit oh never mind what will happen to the teachers next year
2:50:18
direct and simple question anyone want to go uh on that I'll
2:50:24
go U counselor scarelli Simon thank you for coming up tonight I'm so impressed
2:50:29
with you coming to this Podium because there are so many skaty cat adults but you have the guts to come up so I
2:50:36
applaud you for that okay so I have family members that might be your teachers I have children that went
2:50:43
through the schools just like you did and I know it's scary right now because you're listening to grown-ups talk about
2:50:49
we're going to cut positions we're going to hurt teachers that's not the intent my friend we have a solution that that's
2:50:57
easy we can use money that the city has saved that can fix it right now instead
2:51:02
of going to a vote that's something that Mr Scott pelly asked for years months and months ago and when you come come to
2:51:08
this point my friend you have to understand we want to make sure that every single one of your teachers are
2:51:14
back next year because you know why you deserve it so so thank thank you for coming up thank
2:51:21
you thank you um I'll take this one Simon I'll go to Anna and then I'll go
2:51:28
Anna um thanks again always good to see um young folks coming up here and asking
2:51:36
these great questions so um I just want to talk a little bit about the difference between seven and eight
2:51:43
proposition seven preposition eight um and seven is going to make sure that we
2:51:48
provide the same resources that we and the same you know budget basically that
2:51:54
we have been providing um prop eight is g to be where we make sure that we can
2:52:01
actually really do a little bit more that we can take care of our teachers
2:52:07
that we can pay them better salaries that we can pay Paras better salaries um that we take care of them the way that
2:52:13
they are taking care of you um so that's just a little bit about the difference between those two
2:52:19
and why they're separate thank you Anna thank you thank
2:52:24
you and Simon thank you for asking your question I know you've been at a few of these meetings now and you've asked a few questions now um I know you remember
2:52:31
some meetings from the springtime of the school committee um where we were really worried about uh whether we were going
2:52:37
to be able to keep all the teachers and the par professionals and all the other people in your school who try to make your day a good day and make sure you
2:52:44
learn something um we were able uh this
2:52:49
to keep most of those people by using the one-time funds that we're talking about um that the city had staved up but
2:52:57
in the long run um it's really difficult uh for us to keep that promise if we
2:53:02
don't have the money to keep paying people so um question seven as Anna
2:53:08
noted um would allow us to make sure that we can keep everybody on um who's
2:53:13
there now we don't have to look at asking people to leave firing people laying people off
2:53:19
um and question eight uh means that the city and the schools have a lot more opportunity to give our teachers and the
2:53:26
people in your school the pay that they deserve to have more staff in the schools to help out in the classroom um
2:53:33
and if we don't see a yes vote on those two questions it's going to be a lot harder for the city to do those things
2:53:39
so um we're we're going to do our best no matter what happens and one hard thing about democracy that you might be
2:53:45
learning pretty young is sometimes people don't agree with you you and sometimes people make a decision that
2:53:50
you don't want them to make and if that happens we're going to do our very best to try to make sure that everything stays okay um but if people do say yes
2:53:59
it'll be easier for us to do that thank you thank you
2:54:07
thanks all right um we'll go to zoom we have Jess H name and address for the
2:54:14
record you have one minute to ask one question
2:54:19
Jess haly full loock Road um so what I'm hearing if these go through that
2:54:26
there'll be more funding for the schools now my son who started sixth grade this
2:54:34
year still can't read first grade reading level the school denied meeting
2:54:40
with me for a reading tutor for him oneon-one he's in a class with 11 kids
2:54:47
trying to learn to read which doesn't work so is this something that if this
2:54:53
goes through the schools will have more funding and maybe my son could get a tuto to learn how to read he's been on
2:55:00
IEP with the Medford School since he was three years old thank you for your
2:55:07
question we'll go to uh councelor Collins and Council Laro thank you just
2:55:13
in brief um you know obviously we know uh that's really tough and we know that
2:55:18
the student experience coming out of the pandemic when so much critical in-classroom learning time was missed that's really tough it's really tough
2:55:24
for a lot of students I feel for you um I will just say that I know the topic of
2:55:30
literacy coaches in classroom specifically came up a lot in school
2:55:35
committee budget meetings in City Council budget meetings um and as we were discussing putting together these numbers for um proposition seven and
2:55:42
Proposition 8 specifically because we know that that is such a need um one of my big concerns if the overrides don't
2:55:49
pass is that we would not be able to bring online the literacy coaches that we know that students like your son um
2:55:54
really need more of in the schools and if they do pass we would be empowered to be able to have more of
2:56:01
those coaches in the schools helping students um make up for the time that they lost during the pandemic and just
2:56:07
due to other factors thank you thank you Council zaro two minutes
2:56:13
um I just wanted to say that I'm sorry to hear about that situation I actually
2:56:18
know a lot of people who are have kids with learning disabilities in the
2:56:23
schools that struggle similarly and I know it's uh big hill to overcome and
2:56:31
it's a lot to Grapple with and it's really frustrating and I know we have a lot of work to do and I also think this
2:56:37
is a school committee question and it's not something that we and city council grapple with very much um and I don't
2:56:44
think that we are equipped to answer it fully um but I feel for you and it's
2:56:51
really hard um and uh I would recommend
2:56:56
bringing it up to school committee asking if you could get something like that on the agenda or speaking to the school superintendent I know it can be
2:57:03
super super frustrating I have friends with Advocates it's really hard it's really expensive it's really unequitable
2:57:10
um because if you have money you can hire somebody to either be a tutor or
2:57:15
get an advocate it's really horrible it's a bad system literacy is so complicated and difficult so I'm really
2:57:22
sorry you're going through that anyone else on this
2:57:29
question um I can just note quickly
2:57:35
um that the one-time funds used to avoid Cuts this year that were postponed save
2:57:41
two literacy interventionist I think two positions were eliminated um and those
2:57:47
could be restored uh there's also talk about the curriculum um around literacy and what
2:57:55
that would take to implement I do agree with Council Lazaro that you know talking to school committee School
2:58:00
administration they'd be able to provide more information in details um and I don't know if either of those solutions
2:58:06
would help uh your child or your specific situation but I do know that uh
2:58:11
paying our PR professionals more to reduce turnover help students with disabilities I know that investing more
2:58:17
in intervention iist and Specialists helps our students with disabilities um and the school having more resources to
2:58:23
do that would help thank
2:58:31
you person on Zoom is Micah kessman uh so we'll go back to the podium name and
2:58:38
address for the record you have one minute to ask one
2:58:44
question a little taller um charl Rodriguez Park Street um I just
2:58:52
wanted a little info before my question medford's in the top third per people spend for the state if you um factor in
2:58:59
the residential exemption Medford is on the same level as Somerville and Malin for taxation uh in 2022 23 school year
2:59:07
in March 1st of 2024 103 elll students were added bringing our percentage of
2:59:13
elll students up from a stable 10% to 15% these students are very costly to
2:59:19
educate probably contribute to the issues that you're speaking of the state should be stepping in to help us that is
2:59:24
an enormous increase of students that are very expensive to educate um two admins were added when
2:59:31
the emergency free cash was added to our school budget and the more money that we
2:59:36
add to our school budget the less state aid we will get and our bill for the charter school will also increase so my
2:59:44
question is if we can't pay for Basics why why would we extend the school day
2:59:50
and increase wages solely based on the extension of the school day which is how question 8 is written when we can't pay
2:59:57
raises at C rate because when the next contract comes up we'll have to do the
3:00:02
raises based on these inflated salaries that we can't afford I got an answer from a school Committee Member today and
3:00:09
the answer was ultimately the school committee will decide how this money is spent so there's no guarantee that
3:00:15
what's in the questions is actually even going to happen um another one told me that the money
3:00:21
that we will gain in the school department will be used to have conversations and we can discuss wish
3:00:28
list items that time we're way over is the question about so the question is if
3:00:33
we can't pay for Basics why would we extend the school day and increase wages
3:00:39
to reflect a longer working period when we can't pay the raises at current
3:00:44
levels this is of course contingent on if we're actually planning to follow the words and the questions thank you um
3:00:51
anyone want to talk about that councelor Callahan two minutes um
3:00:57
sure and again these these questions are better answered by school committee folks my understanding is that um you
3:01:03
can't really compare what is what our entire school budget is to other cities
3:01:08
very well because other cities don't include a lot of the things that we include in the school budget so it's not Apples to Apples um and I wish I could
3:01:15
rattle off all the things that are included and not included the ones that I recall are I think it and now because
3:01:22
of uh postco there's just a lot more um you know Chromebooks required for for
3:01:28
students and other it related things it is often not included in school budgets in other cities but it is included in
3:01:34
our school budget um I think there are parts of building maintenance they're included in our school budget that are not included in other City School
3:01:40
budgets so while it appears if you just look at the number it appears that we
3:01:45
spend more per student um I I don't believe that that is an accurate way of
3:01:51
looking at it simply because of the things that are aren't included um and then the I just wanted a comment about the school day um unless I'm mistaken
3:01:59
please correct me if I'm wrong uh we have one of the shortest school days of anywhere in the entire state that we are
3:02:06
barely like a minute or two above the state absolute minimum for the number of minutes that children have to spend in
3:02:12
school across the entire year president can you verify that
3:02:17
because that's just St B I believe that's based on time on learning
3:02:23
statistics issued by the district that's how you well I believe that's where the information is coming from councilor
3:02:29
scar two minutes uh thank you um to your point M Rodriguez I think that this is
3:02:34
why question a again this is why these questions are so vague right that people are confused because the determination
3:02:42
of this $4 million is so we can align the vocational school building with the
3:02:48
high school building so we can increase the day so we can provide programming for both levels right so here's
3:02:56
something it hasn't been negotiated it hasn't been discussed so where is it
3:03:01
gonna where is the money going to go when it's not even not even entertained these are the questions people have the
3:03:09
question that's $4 million the state expert in former superintendent of
3:03:15
Medford Roy bson stated if during
3:03:20
negotiations that's what we're looking for is to line those bells then it's negotiations for the high school and
3:03:26
Vocational School teachers to increase their their uh their
3:03:31
rate realistically you're looking at $600,000 when you're looking to do that
3:03:37
group right $4 million for what like we've said more Arts programs we have
3:03:44
art programs the issue is aligning the BT and programming we have we have it we
3:03:50
just got to line the Bell so again it's so wide open to say $4 million to do
3:03:57
arts and to uh align this process with the vacational school and the high school is so vague how can we even
3:04:05
entertain voting on it when we know the ramifications to the rest of the
3:04:10
community again please hear what was said being said
3:04:17
tonight there is so many open-ended questions there's so many issues that people don't know how we got here we
3:04:23
don't we we we have foyer requests that show that there was no proper discussions with school department
3:04:29
members when the school department isn't part of this financial task force for an override and then a question like
3:04:35
question eight comes up it's so vague thanking coun are we sure are we sure that we need an override that's two
3:04:41
minutes so thank you thank you could you please next time give me that 10 seconds sorry no I appreciate it flag it a
3:04:46
little bit my bad thank you um councelor saying two minutes I'll be extremely
3:04:52
brief um because I think a lot of this is has been said before um the way I
3:04:57
view it is there there there's a question out there about why are we doing XYZ when you know we need to do
3:05:02
the basics and I you know question seven gives us the the ability to do the
3:05:08
basics question eight allows us to think bigger picture and think um think about how we can improve the school system not
3:05:15
merely just matching status quo but to exceed status quo um I think there are a
3:05:20
variety of different perspectives on that specific policy that's why we we're opposing it to the voters that's why
3:05:25
we're letting voters vote on it but we do need the money first to be able to
3:05:31
engage in a real a real comprehensive renegotiation of what that school day
3:05:36
looks like of what programs we can offer and you know this is just the point of disagreement between me and my fellow
3:05:42
counselor I think Medford parents and Medford students know that our schools don't offer at the same programming the
3:05:48
other school districts do I think meford parents pford students know that we're falling short and that we have a lot of
3:05:54
programming that we need to catch up on it's you know we have great teachers doing Arts programs Sports programs ex
3:06:01
uh coaches doing sports programs Etc that's great but the question is are we
3:06:07
where we should be comprehensively you know we've already had to merge drama classes to cut offerings in the Arts in
3:06:13
the last budget the question is you know do we stay there do we keep with that or
3:06:20
do we expand our offerings for our children where does it say that though because that's eloquent just you would
3:06:27
have to look at it if it was presented that way again it wasn't thank you thank
3:06:32
you follow up she's done about her the question on the difference in the
3:06:38
students um in the cost per student per year sure so councelor Callahan
3:06:44
mentioned that it was um the students differences are calculated based on different amounts but when I looked at
3:06:50
the data Medford appeared in the top third for the entire State the schools that were below it were approximately
3:06:56
six to 8,000 less per student even if we factored in the tech spend of $500,000
3:07:03
that the counselor mentioned that only averages out to about $1,000 per student
3:07:09
so I haven't seen any evidence that Medford is spending significantly less than other schools that we're not
3:07:14
spending enough I know no one answered about the whole increase in the elll students but these
3:07:20
are factors that are actually impacting our budget and if the council it we're not going to catch up there's another 15
3:07:26
El students waiting to join those schools and if we don't get more money from the state this override is going to
3:07:31
be nothing it's just GNA be thank you C Lazaro two minutes um I I I'm confused
3:07:37
are you saying that we shouldn't be accepting English language Learners into our schools no I literally said they are
3:07:44
very expensive students expensive we're not going to do back we're that's not what we're doing here
3:07:50
we're asking questions about the overheads we're not talking about how English language Learners are expensive for our schools these are this is a
3:07:57
public school district that is not something that we're doing that's not acceptable let's just take a pause here we've had our it's been it's it's been
3:08:04
three hours the state should be helping pay for those the state formula do we're not up hold on everyone can I speak
3:08:10
please thank you thank you everyone three hours in we've been pretty good I appreciate
3:08:16
everybody we've had a difficult conversation yeah but Council shouldn't
3:08:21
be attacking res I don't think anyone I think there's been a lot of back and forth Cheryl I don't want to talk about
3:08:28
commenting on aggressiveness we can interpret people's comments in many ways I think you would agree you don't want
3:08:34
unfavorable interpretation of your comments and neither does council isar I think we're going to leave it at that so I hope that Advocate State money to your
3:08:41
point we do we constantly advocate for more State money to your point and I'm putting my two minutes on now the state
3:08:48
formula is not good for Medford even with the student Opportunity Act even with Chapter 70 money given the charter
3:08:54
formula given the reimbursement formula it's bad for Medford even with a 5% increase in elll which is one of the big
3:09:00
sources of funding in the the Chapter 70 formula we're not getting a lot more the
3:09:05
main reason for that is because of our estimated you know minimum contribution as a city what the state plans to give
3:09:12
us and a lot of that is based on what is a city's capacity to pay for things itself versus the state Malden gets $60
3:09:19
million a year in net aid for their schools we get 11 yeah maybe we need to
3:09:26
well I mean you know I would I would love to I would love if the formula treated us better but it doesn't because
3:09:32
essentially because of our property values I wanted to get to your point um specifically on these questions question
3:09:40
eight it's not just for the high school schedule it's that's one thing that's one of three things it's High School
3:09:46
schedule alignment so that vocational and arts kids can do both it's expanding classroom instruction opportunities
3:09:53
districtwide whether that means more staff or more teachers and it's classroom teacher and Par professional
3:09:59
compensation so paying existing staff more um I was told it was extend the day
3:10:05
I can read you the question shall the city of menford be allowed to assess an additional $4 million in real estate and personal property taxes for fy2 General
3:10:13
operations of the Medford Public Schools to create a high school schedule that increases taas starts and vacational
3:10:18
programming expand classroom instructional opportunities and for classroom teacher and Par professional
3:10:23
compensation for the fiscal year beginning July 1st 2024 that's the whole question it's for all three of those
3:10:28
purposes the district spends 85% of its Budget on salaries and the reason it's not more specific is because to get more
3:10:35
specific would be to violate collective bargaining laws all of that has to be bargained so it gives us the money to
3:10:40
have that conversation with our Educators and these have been ongoing questions so I'm really hopeful it
3:10:46
passes because I'd like to pay our teachers more I'd like to pay our par professionals more and I'd also like to fix the school
3:10:52
day well the community is very cons let's let's move on we're gonna move to
3:10:57
the next question uh we'll go to still have a city council meeting get to Matt Matt let me run the meeting
3:11:04
thanks we'll go to the podium because the person on Zoom has already asked a question name address record you have
3:11:10
one minute hey Bill gigo Winter Street um would you agree that uh within the
3:11:16
budget I mean we're saying that school budget is in very shortfall very dire
3:11:21
need uh we're in you know very bad shape um would you agree that every
3:11:26
penny every dime every nickel will help that uh will help the budget is that the
3:11:32
whole question no it's not the whole question okay so because I know the rest of the question yeah I mean okay I would
3:11:39
imagine you would agree that every every every nickel every helps okay so uh you
3:11:44
guys passed um a 100 146% raise for the school committee that l no it it ended
3:11:52
up being a little bit less than that and stretched out significant okay and
3:11:58
um uh what was I gonna say um uh no you you threw me off here I'll give you 10
3:12:06
more seconds Bill okay um so so did the
3:12:11
financial task force during this whole whole thing when I mean we've been hear that the budget has been bad for a very
3:12:16
very long time um did the financial task force step back and say Hey listen guys
3:12:22
this probably isn't a good time right now because this money comes out of the school budget which it does correct it
3:12:29
comes out of the school budget those raises came out of the school budget it was an an enormous raise and did any did
3:12:36
anyone from the financial task force say now is probably not the best time to be
3:12:41
giving School Committee Member raises thank you for the question does anyone want to go for it councelor comment
3:12:47
two minutes thank you appreciate the question absolutely um I am normally actually in every
3:12:54
single penny every single nickel counts type of person in my household budget certainly you know we take every penny
3:13:00
very seriously in Municipal budgeting because this is our Collective wealth to do with but I also think
3:13:07
that in all of the discussions in public meetings City Council meetings school committee meetings task force meetings
3:13:14
around what is the number that we should put forward that we're asking people to vote vote for to invest in the schools
3:13:19
um I spent a lot of those meetings advocating for a much much much higher number than just 7.5 to be spread around
3:13:26
the DPW and the schools and other expenses but mostly the schools right and I think when we're having discussions that are essentially landing
3:13:33
at this is the minimum amount that we can try to invest in our schools to have
3:13:39
to at least hold the line and prime the pump for them then getting better in the future maybe not even get better this
3:13:45
year but at least keep them from backsliding so we can hope to have them improve in future fiscal years when $7
3:13:53
million is the scope of the investment that is essentially the minimum for not
3:13:58
backsliding you put that against a 2% Cola for certain elected and bringing up
3:14:05
other electeds to not even parody with that position I think if we're having an
3:14:10
honest discussion we can all look at that and say apples and oranges that's the same I'm not respect
3:14:17
that's my honest opinion anyone else want to go on this
3:14:23
question anybody else on the question nope okay all right um I'll just say for
3:14:28
one bill I'll go I think it's actually a symptom of the same problem to go 25
3:14:35
years without addressing and correcting that issue is the same reason that we're talking about all the other deferred
3:14:41
questions deferred issues deferred things in in the scope of it 25 years what 25 years 25 years of of not
3:14:47
adjusting that compensation amount right it went from 2000 to 2024 without being adjusted right and so I think it's
3:14:54
actually a symptom of the same problem you still have four new members that are on on that I'm not gonna discuss okay
3:14:59
I'm talking in the big picture bill right we're talking about on every single
3:15:05
thing basically every single thing in the city water sewer school buildings fire station uh funding of the DPW staff
3:15:13
funding of paraprofessional pay the school day The Vocational I mean I could give you a 30 point litany list of
3:15:19
things that the city spent 20 or 30 or 40 years not fixing this was one of them
3:15:24
it was within our Authority it's a symptom of that larger problem we fixed that one thing now we're asking the
3:15:30
voters to fix a larger set of problems and I don't think those things are in congruous that's just my opinion and I
3:15:35
appreciate your question if I can Mr President councel SC thank you I I I I missed most of the
3:15:44
the question bill but um again like with saying we're hearing a systemic issue
3:15:49
that's been happening for years but the way the process I'll say again the way the process has has come forth the way
3:15:56
the process come full full circle right now it's putting so many people so many
3:16:01
residents in flux and fear right and I think that's the biggest concern I think
3:16:07
the way that we've we've we've moved forward that this group has moved forward to present an an out that really
3:16:14
isn't an out like they've said it's not going to really help right we don't know where the money's going things are still
3:16:20
questioned for each each question there's not it's not it's not certainties right we we've already heard
3:16:27
from everybody that hasn't been part of the process so again why continue this why keep moving
3:16:35
forward and understanding that we're hurting real people we're hurting real residents and when I I like again I'm
3:16:42
talking about the children I'm talking about the seniors I'm talking about our renters I'm talking about our home owners we're hurting a lot of people
3:16:48
right now for something that quote unquote is so minimal because the truth of the matter
3:16:55
is this is so minimal and such such divide what we're now seeing is are we
3:17:01
truly going to look at a next question when we really need it properly or are we going to look at it with with with
3:17:09
caution and saying I'm definitely going to stand against it I'll use a $200 million $400 million
3:17:16
High School down the line imagine if that process was done how we destroy PE homeowners right now senior
3:17:22
citizens people on fixed incomes it would destroy us this is why this
3:17:27
process has to be done in a better way it shouldn't be done in a vacuum so thank you Mr President thank
3:17:34
you anyone else on this question see none we'll go to the podium name and address for the record you have
3:17:40
one minute to ask one question 61 sign my original question is ready to share
3:17:45
so I'll switch to another one I'll just like to point out that uh indeed total expenditures per pil in met for are
3:17:51
higher than in Stoneham Everett Arlington Winchester and Malden of our neighbors only Somerville spends more
3:17:58
per pupil than Metford um I just hope that the the financial task force um has
3:18:04
focused on bureaucratic inefficiencies and inefficiencies in resource allocation uh so my question is um the
3:18:10
fiscal year 25 budget was approved at the June 11 city council meeting this means that there W there will not be any
3:18:17
budget cuts to met for public schools until at least July 2025 moreover met for revenues are
3:18:24
expected to get going up for fiscal year 26 that's without the overrides of course they will go up more with the
3:18:30
overrides um why should we then expect any budget cuts in the future thank you
3:18:37
sure anyone want to go on that I really should be going last here
3:18:44
um well I I think if I can Mr President Council I think from we heard from
3:18:50
parents the fear right that we're going to cut I believe one school C member saying it was 55 to 65 teachers then it
3:18:58
was now 35 and the pain the fear is going to be spread all over right
3:19:04
everybody's gonna feel the pain that was the comment that's gone out publicly by that school K member right and I think
3:19:11
what what you're saying to this is saying that you know are we going to cut a teach is
3:19:17
going to be cut in January January 2025 out if the override fails in November that's a question I
3:19:23
believe I don't know I don't know because in these questions these override questions you didn't say to
3:19:30
cover the cost of 55 to 65 teachers that will be cut not in question seven or in
3:19:36
question eight I didn't see that so um that again leads to
3:19:42
another example of we sure we know voting
3:19:48
on and are we sure we need to move forward and was this transparent enough but it might it might I might interrupt
3:19:55
so the the fiscal year 2025 budget has already been passed so it doesn't in jary there should be no Cuts even if
3:20:02
talking about the next budget so clarity thank you so Clarity everyone with Simon
3:20:07
your teach is not going to be cut this year because that's the word going out the word was at these meetings now right
3:20:13
they will not be cut there'll be no Cuts until next fiscal year we have more money next school year and
3:20:19
exactly it'll give us time because we had an opportunity Gaston we had an opportunity back in 20 2023 when we
3:20:27
realized that we were using AR Esser funding to balance a budget of operations which you shouldn't that we
3:20:34
know that but this Council voted on a back room deal that that's what happened and then they moved forward with this
3:20:39
financial task force so here we are right now that was only 1.7 only 1.7 so
3:20:44
right so this is where we are right now I'd like to not go back forth guys oh I apologize so this is thank you I
3:20:49
apologize that thank you um go to vice president Collins two minutes thank you
3:20:56
and gueston I realized I may have misunderstood your question um with what fiscal year you were talking about but I know that um part of our discussion has
3:21:03
been around the um the salaries that this year are currently on one-time funds that will expire and putting
3:21:10
forward the override questions as an on-ramp for those positions is again once that onetime funding that currently
3:21:16
being funded by has been depleted but in your clarification I think that my point might have been you
3:21:22
served by something else that you were saying do you want to you asking for
3:21:29
clarification only if if you're asking for clarification you can clarify no I'm I'm good up my okay all right um just to
3:21:37
your point to your question yes we're talking about fiscal 26 uh teachers contract Paris contract both expired
3:21:43
June 30 2025 so we're talking about a new contract year any increased pay for them would be on the new year um that's
3:21:50
if there are no agreements or side agreements settled before then um you
3:21:55
know we're seeing significant cost essentially all of the two and a half increase and most of the new growth
3:22:00
increase are being used to pay for fixed cost growth increases on things that we've already commit to do either in
3:22:05
contracts or where we have mandatory spending on health insurance and pensions so um yes this would be for
3:22:12
fiscal 26 we're currently once again this year we're doing basically counselor scell said we're using onetime
3:22:18
funds right now to cover the budget to try to get us through to a point when we have reliable recurring Revenue which
3:22:24
the financial task force has put forward in the form of these overrides and if that is not available that's when in the
3:22:30
it's next year but it's the budget process is going to happen from February to June upcoming it's in the next few
3:22:36
months that's when those decisions will be made and uh whether or not we know we have the reliable sustainable Revenue to
3:22:42
pay for those things or we don't is dependent on the override questions councelor Callahan two minutes just a
3:22:50
super quick comment that um teachers who are underpaid uh compared to how much
3:22:55
they could make in other cities um they do think about whether the city is able to fund them the next year um so if we
3:23:03
want people to stay it's it's just healthier for us um in terms of teacher morale and uh longevity to have for them
3:23:12
to know that the budget is there for their um for their salaries for the next year um because people do try to think
3:23:19
ahead and they're you know they they're they're less we'll just have more turnover that's all
3:23:25
thanks thank you anyone else on the question all right we go to another
3:23:32
question uh still someone who's already asked at on Zoom so we'll go to first time question um two minutes or one
3:23:40
minute one question name and address record please Paul Varian 27 Central lab Medford um my understanding is that the
3:23:47
Medford teachers salaries are very competitive to surrounding cities even Newton and Welsley and we have one of
3:23:54
the best benefit packages in the state um correct me if
3:24:00
I'm wrong not to say that we don't want to keep our good teachers that's mandatory that we do do that my question
3:24:07
is that what have we done other than this two and a half%
3:24:12
override um such as grants um growth things like that have we really expanded
3:24:19
everything that we could do rather than having this two and a half% override we've had this override is going to not
3:24:26
only affect our taxes it's going to affect our excise taxes our CP CPA tax we've already had our water
3:24:33
bills um raised how much can senior citizens single person like me put out
3:24:40
the well is only so deep and to top that off this is a little off topic but how
3:24:45
can you justify giving yourselves raises and the mayor giving herself a raise when the taxpayers are doing nothing but
3:24:53
give give give never in my life in my career have I ever said I'm working so
3:24:59
hard I think I deserve a raise it's just unconscionable so my question is what
3:25:05
has this city council done to make it so we don't have to have this two and a
3:25:10
half% override and still provide the city what it needs and we need to do
3:25:17
more thank you we go to vice president C two
3:25:23
minutes thank you really fair question I'm glad that you asked it in terms of what's directly within our purview as
3:25:29
City counselors I know for as long as I've been on the council I'm in my second term now um we have been I think extremely focused on um parts of our
3:25:39
jurisdiction that relate directly to expanded commercial tax base which is the ways that we can increase City
3:25:44
Revenue without going to residents um we've been talking a lot about our zoning project especially recently um it
3:25:51
didn't begin recently we've been fighting for I think three terms and longer that I've been on the council to be able to work with a zoning consultant
3:25:58
to do really smart tailored zoning that will allow us to grow the parts of the city that people have been wanting to
3:26:04
see growth in for years so that we'll see what we want to see there and also be adding to our commercial tax Bas and
3:26:10
we've been starting to do that and we're already starting to see the seeds of results on Mystic gav of course that
3:26:15
Revenue isn't going to come online into like a longer time scale than we really that's not we don't see the rewards from
3:26:22
that in one year we see that in 5 10 20 years but that is directly within our jurisdiction we've been extremely
3:26:27
focused on this Council on laying the groundwork for commercial tax based growth um City Hall departments I think
3:26:35
are really one of the things that they're remarkable for is in Grant seeking especially our Planning Development sustainability office and I
3:26:41
do know that every Department in the city works really hard to get grant funding for some of it's essential um
3:26:48
projects or other projects that we don't have to take those monies out of the operating budget the city council
3:26:53
whenever we can we support those grants um we approve when that's within our jurisdiction we try to support um
3:27:01
resources funding for projects coming from not from residents uh wallets
3:27:07
essentially in addition um then there's the advocacy side and people bringing up what is the state doing about this what
3:27:13
is the state paying in how are other players paying in we constantly Advocate um for an increase in trying to remember
3:27:20
what this uh ugga actually stands for I think it's unrestricted like General aggregation constantly advocating for
3:27:27
the state to pay into cities like Medford more so that we can do more for our residents the way that the state
3:27:33
would like us to do constantly advocating for changes in the payment and Lee of tax agreement laws so that we
3:27:38
can turn to institutions like toughs and say hey you don't pay a lot of property
3:27:43
tax all of our resid all of our other residents do let's make this more fair trying to pull what levers we can I let
3:27:49
you go way over I'm sorry okay thank thank you Council leming two minutes
3:27:54
then councelor Lazaro then councelor sang then councelor scarelli now councelor Collins uh said a lot of
3:28:00
points that I was going to make which is uh to give the bird's eye view this um
3:28:06
most of this council is pretty uh is fairly new about half of us are in our first term um three and so we are trying
3:28:14
to lay the foundations for uh the further growth and development of the
3:28:19
city the most important thing the most important component of that is the zoning overhaul um a couple meetings ago
3:28:28
I brought up uh a linkage fee proposal which would essentially raise the fees
3:28:33
that developers pay for the first time um for to the city for their developments for the first time in 30
3:28:39
years that passes Council six to1 I think that you'll find that we are
3:28:45
intens focused on the financials so that we will have growth for the next 10 years for the next 20 years uh in
3:28:52
general um this city there a lot of the political history of this city has been
3:28:59
um sort of attempting to Kick the Can down the road or just say oh or just
3:29:04
come up with like vague ways to say oh we should all come together and find Solutions but not actually ever backing
3:29:11
anything this is this council is actually laying the foundations um and passing actual ordinances and
3:29:18
legislation so that we won't have to worry in the future um so so yes we are
3:29:24
building a foundation that should have been built a very long time ago and this these overrides are really meant to
3:29:30
address more short shortterm concerns so thank you thank
3:29:35
[Applause] you councel saying two minutes or did I get that or was it councelor zaro
3:29:41
Council zaro to minutes it was me but I was just going to mention councelor Lemmings um linkage face which he mentioned so coun two minutes thank you
3:29:49
um I just wanted to speak to the grant part of things I know um as president be said before our city departments work
3:29:56
very very hard to apply to as many grants as possible but I think when we think about um applying to Grants which
3:30:01
I'm totally behind I think we should do we we should maximize it we also have to keep in mind that it takes a team of
3:30:07
grant writers and Grant managers after we get that Grant to put that Grant into practice and do all the reporting and
3:30:13
accounting that we need for that and so that actually takes a lot of Staff capacity on on the city H Hall end right
3:30:20
now that we don't have that general fund capacity for either so that's you know another I think reason why paying
3:30:26
attention to like increasing the revenue for our city government is so so important because it allows us to
3:30:33
eventually eventually gives us the freedom to um to have people in place to
3:30:38
be applying to those grants that make more money over over time so it's kind of like a stone rolling down amountain
3:30:43
collecting dirt um I I another thing about grants though is that oftentimes they're not over a long
3:30:50
enough period of time for us to be able to retain the staff that we want to as counselor Callahan mentioned like if
3:30:56
you're a teacher you want to make sure that you can stay in that position next year that you're you're having that job or else you're you're applying to other
3:31:02
jobs right and I think that's the case when we apply for Grants as well um that's why you know we have great
3:31:09
workers in City Hall hired on grants but a lot of them don't um are are looking
3:31:14
for other jobs because because they don't have that stability and so we need to give our city that Financial in my
3:31:19
opinion that Financial stability um on the points of competitive salaries 30
3:31:25
second suggested thanks um on the point of competitive salaries um I think it's
3:31:30
really important to also consider that our teachers are competing or our school systems competing with private schools as well and that there's this there's a
3:31:37
race to to pay teachers more to pay for diversity all of that is affecting how
3:31:43
our ability to retain our staff and to hire new staff as well um that's not to mention the distri district specific
3:31:50
characteristics that come out in a union bargaining session as thank you councelor s councilor
3:31:56
scarelli first let's start off by the teachers in compensation a good way to make sure they go is is scare them with
3:32:05
layoffs when you have an Avenue to save them but with this question the truth of
3:32:11
the matter is in most communities it's growth growth growth growth New Growth smart development that's what happens
3:32:19
that's what happened in neighboring communities like Somerville during the pandemic what happened in effort what happened in Malden you saw New Growth
3:32:26
I've heard my Council colleagues say that it'll take us five to seven years to see that wrong we had 340b projects
3:32:33
that not only would bring in valuable funding through permits and fees and
3:32:38
then the new tax break new tax base but also open up an opportunity for what we
3:32:45
lack here is affordable housing and this mayor has voided that
3:32:50
so like I said just one project and I'll say it over and over again because we've talked to the owner of the building he
3:32:56
put in a place for 40b project 400 units at the Old Gold Gym site 3 to5 million
3:33:02
just in permits would have come right to us right away three to five million for one project and then you would see an
3:33:08
increase once that's built you would then have a tax base of more to $6 to $9
3:33:15
million coming com in now what you saw is the mayor fight that which is a 40b
3:33:21
project which you can't fight and win in court we know that by law she takes it to the court they lost 30 seconds then
3:33:27
she brings it back and she appeals it while we're paying
3:33:32
lawyers we lose the appeal but at the same time we now have these developers that have walked away to methord because
3:33:38
now they're in Watertown and now other neighborhoods and this gentleman just lost $5 million by sitting on a property
3:33:45
hoping he could develop methord the right way the other piece we have right now the mayor's J did everybody he
3:33:50
there's an RFP for five spots in methord square what's the plan we don't know
3:33:57
this is again lack of transparency and openness in this community thank you thank you if I can oh sorry councelor
3:34:04
count in two minutes uh yeah I just um so my understanding is that there are some numbers going around comparing um
3:34:11
Medford salaries with uh communities like Arlington that actually just have inaccurate numbers um and and those are
3:34:19
all public so you can actually go on the web and like look up those numbers so I encourage you to do that just to make sure that the the numbers that you're
3:34:25
seeing are accurate thanks I can just say that whatever happens in this override whether it passes or it doesn't
3:34:30
just I could just please to the city council think of the elderly um remember my vintage 1954 last time um that we
3:34:40
have a limited income I mean I'm lucky I get a pension and my Social Security but
3:34:46
I don't know how long I can continue to live in Medford if it's going to continue to do that and I don't think I speak for myself so thank you for the
3:34:52
work you do and again just think of the long-term citizens that are here and thank you thank you I just wanted to I
3:35:00
did have a couple quick answers probably to your question too um it's okay Bill
3:35:06
keeps posting online something I posted I think about five years ago where I said I don't think we need an override right now I want to explore all the
3:35:11
other options first and then we did we explored short-term rentals export marijuana Revenue we started on the
3:35:17
zoning um which has borne some fruit and will bear more but not fast enough um
3:35:23
you know we maxed out the local fees and stuff like the hotel meals and rooms Etc
3:35:30
to the most the state will let us do it um we're trying to get the state to open up the home roll petition so we can
3:35:35
update the linkage fees for the first time in 30 years I had a resolution on for um a a fee schedule update to look
3:35:44
at the whole city fee schedule to uh which many of them haven't updated been updated in many years so we're going to get a response back on that all of that
3:35:51
does not generate a significant enough amount of Revenue to address the needs that's why I feel that in all the six
3:35:58
now six years of budgets that I've worked on and everything else my answer to the question is we've looked at all
3:36:04
the other buckets that we have control over they're no longer sufficient to address the need and that's why I
3:36:09
support these overrides so um that's just one piece of it on the development you know Somerville started its
3:36:16
significant summer Vision plans 20 25 years ago they started seeing the first fruits of that in significant way 15
3:36:23
years ago it's really boomed the last five to 10 years we're at the beginning of that process not the middle not the
3:36:29
end I wish we'd started that 25 years ago I think I'd be much happier during budget season if we started that 25
3:36:36
years ago because the decisions would be a lot easier um we're doing it now it's starting to happen I agree with
3:36:42
councelor scarpelli I don't agree with some of the legal proceedings that happened around 40 BS but it's not the
3:36:47
the whole sum question here um last thing I'll say you started out with the teachers
3:36:53
compensation having talked to our teachers having heard from our teachers union our par professionals Union in
3:36:58
this space and in the school committee I know they don't feel like their compensation is sufficient and competitive I know many of them feel
3:37:03
pressure to leave for other districts and I also know when it comes to benefits that there's been ongoing negotiation issues around the healthcare
3:37:10
benefit uh for all of our employees police fire DPW uh City Hall and the
3:37:16
schools so um just wanted to put that perspective out there thank you thank
3:37:21
you we'll go to the podium name and address to record please one minute for one question Danielle marelo 11 Spencer
3:37:28
Road I'm local 1032 Union president um I would first like to thank everybody who wants to see improvements made to the
3:37:34
living conditions of the fire department um president Bay as you mentioned Financial Health earlier which made me
3:37:40
want to ask all of you if you genuinely feel that it is fiscally responsible to fund a $30 million project
3:37:46
with all of the functional shortfalls that it has there will not support any fire department growth while our city
3:37:51
keeps growing and if the building plan does come to fruition we are you propos that we house all the firefighters who
3:37:57
will need to be hired in order to meet our NFPA and soon to be OSHA uh safe Staffing requirements that are um based
3:38:05
off of our population in the type of homes that we have here in the city thank you for the question anyone want to go for
3:38:13
it really if I can I think there's more involved
3:38:19
thank you I think there's more involved here I think that it's very clear and cut I think the community can see that
3:38:24
our firen and women do not want this over the rde or this debt exclusion because it hurts our citizenry because
3:38:31
the design and the building that they're looking to build is not adequate for any of them okay we also have a firefighter
3:38:39
sitting standing in front of us that so we all understand why we're in fiscal crisis why we're fiscal issues right
3:38:47
firefighter melino wrote a grant for 11 firefighters through FEMA to to to so
3:38:54
the city would they would the female would pay these 11 firefighters for three years as long as you didn't vary
3:39:00
from those 11 firefighters the mayor came in and said I only want to you have at the end the only caveat is you have
3:39:06
to sustain those 11 firefighters to be at minimal level the mayor came in and
3:39:11
said no we'll only fund five or seven just by doing that what happened it voided the 11 firefighters that would
3:39:19
have been paid for FEMA for three years again we we this Council the mayor had a
3:39:26
outside member do an evaluation to come in and we spent $10,000 to start with
3:39:32
this this firefighter evaluator to come in and look at the fire station we have
3:39:38
yet to hear anything from what I hear that person's been gone now no report no nothing this is the problem we see the
3:39:44
mismanagement of our community it's not that we don't have in certain cases enough funding it's how you manage those
3:39:51
funds so again I thank you for everything you do and we should not vote and support this override because our
3:39:58
firefighters are saying let's not hurt our residents especially it's it's an
3:40:04
inferior product we'll stay where we are even though it's
3:40:09
disgusting thank you thank you anyone else vice president Collins two minutes
3:40:15
thank you I just want to thank you for being here tonight thank you for your advocacy on this issue and thank you for advocating for firefighters in general
3:40:21
in Medford all the time um I understand that this is complicated
3:40:27
I also know that as a city council we approach this at different levels of distance from just the dollars and cents
3:40:33
of the proposal and from the specifics of the fire headquarters proposal that is being worked out um between the fire
3:40:41
department or maybe fire department leadership is more accurate to say okay um and principally the mayor's office
3:40:47
we're not involved in that process um I can say for myself as one counselor that after hearing for so many months and
3:40:52
years that this is an improved headquarters is urgently needed urgently deserved by the fire department um that
3:41:00
that is trying to bring that about as expeditiously as possible is my priority as a city councelor um I know from you
3:41:06
know just following the publications of the you know kind of continually updated concept drafts that's put out by the
3:41:12
mayor's office that um you at least from what I from what I'm able to see it seems like feedback is continuing to be
3:41:19
incorporated and updated again I'm just sharing what's visible on my side I know that there's um another perspective that
3:41:24
you that you represent um it is my sincere Hope from hearing that this is
3:41:30
so urgently needed for so long that um we are able to see a coll a truly
3:41:35
collaborative process that results in fire headquarters that the fire department needs deserves expects um
3:41:44
that we that we can move on with this urgency um and you know I I think that that's just what the community needs
3:41:50
certainly that's what the fire department needs and I hope that we can do that on a time frame that we can move on it um this year thank
3:41:58
you thank you anyone else Council Laro two minutes um I'm currently serving on
3:42:04
the uh committee that is working on the new high school and when the um
3:42:12
msba is uh going to ask us to
3:42:18
um request a debt exclusion for the new high school that's going to be significantly more um significantly more
3:42:25
expensive than what the firehouse will cost um I don't think that we will be
3:42:30
able to come back and ask for another debt exclusion for a firehouse um at
3:42:37
that time I think it will take longer so I think that there's possibility that
3:42:43
there could be an approved fire station between the two parties um once the stud
3:42:49
exclusion if it is approved um then I think the money will be available and a
3:42:56
satisfactory Firehouse can be built or there's the opportunity for it to be built um and I think time is of the
3:43:02
essence because of the limited nature of the timeline given that we have an
3:43:08
urgency of the high school coming down the pike as well um we have a lot of uh
3:43:14
a a lot of people in town buying for very large projects um heading our
3:43:21
Direction and I think we have to balance a lot of people's needs all at once thank you may I councelor
3:43:29
leming so speaking bit more of a bird's eyee view of this I do wish that you
3:43:38
know things were better between the fire Union and the mayor and that that process had gone for both parties and I
3:43:46
am sorry at how that has evolved my view of this is
3:43:51
that even is that the debt exclusion is about funding it it's not I don't see it
3:43:57
as necessarily being tied to whatever plans come out that's just how that's
3:44:03
just how I view it um so that so we want
3:44:09
to fund a $30 million project that's going to fall flat on a on many many
3:44:15
fronts I don't like I understand that that you all were not involved in the planning and I I do not at all you know
3:44:24
think that anybody could you know here had any say in that um like I'm not blaming anybody but this plan that we
3:44:32
have right now in front of us we were told is are minor adjustments like the president said correct uh I I'm going to
3:44:38
speak in a minute but any so you said earlier that they were Minor Adjustments that were going to be able to be be made
3:44:45
we have major issues with this building as it stands right now which means that
3:44:51
it will be a huge waste of money and we're asking taxpayers to do that to to to spend all this money on this building
3:44:57
that is immediately going to be obsolete we won't be able to expand our department to be able to add Services it
3:45:04
has privacy issues nobody here should be running across a hallway in front of a
3:45:10
whole bunch of people like undressed like that's just the way it is I would love to sit down with all of you and
3:45:15
explain all of these things like oneon-one and let you ask all the questions you want I I have drawings of
3:45:22
the the um the building everything and I anytime anybody's available I would love
3:45:28
to talk about it but it's this has nothing to do with the fact that the city the city didn't ask us to have
3:45:34
input like it's not that we're mad about it it's that this this building as it stands as it is right now will not work
3:45:41
for our department our our trucks we're not even sure if our trucks can pull in and out of the building if they can make
3:45:47
the turn or if the one of the truck can even take the left down Miss Gap to respond I mean it's it's there's a lot
3:45:53
of things that need to be addressed here and when you have people trying to put together a building who aren't the
3:45:59
actual like professionals that need to operate in that building it's it's not going to work I
3:46:06
mean we go we'll put out cones we'll pull the truck around we'll do all the things to try to make sure that that
3:46:11
building can fit in that Arrangement on that lot at that size I mean we're not
3:46:17
asking for luxury issues like items we're actually asking for like if the building will be functional and if it
3:46:23
will serve the city for 50 some odd years as this building has stood for this long thanks Danielle I'm going to
3:46:29
put on my two minutes here um and just say a when we were discussing this the
3:46:35
reason that I support this is that I believe a Deb exclusion is the best mechanism to fund the construction of a
3:46:40
new fire headquarters in the to when we're were having the conversations we had had some of the discussions that
3:46:46
we've had over the last two months since the question came out um as you've noted we weren't involved deeply in the
3:46:52
playing process there was an OPM that said this is going to be the estimated cost of the building here's this number and when we
3:47:00
looked at the capital spending for the next five or 10 years that's the biggest item sorry I have a cold I have
3:47:05
something in my mouth so I'm sounded a little funky um but uh that's that is my rationale here that
3:47:13
this is the best way to fund a new headquarters in a timely manner get it built I tend to agree I've read some of
3:47:19
the stuff that has been put online when we're talking about the phase red yellow green uh getting people out of that red
3:47:26
zone um when we're talking about the arrangement on that second floor of the rooms and the showers and not being
3:47:32
enough showers and bathrooms I do believe that both of those would fall under the do regulations around minor
3:47:37
project changes because they would be uh you know changes on the essentially on the floor plan where things are how many
3:47:44
versions of things things are um if there's something bigger than that if we're talking about Bays or a third
3:47:50
floor or something like that um that would be something that would have to go further there are options on that front
3:47:57
um if it's a little bit over the 30 million if we're talking about 35 instead of 30 you could go out to the
3:48:02
bond capacity to do that um and so I would certainly be open to those I have
3:48:08
appreciated some of the dialogue that's been out there I agree with Council councelor leming that I really would
3:48:14
hope that the mayor and you the fire Union could get to a better place and be
3:48:20
in a more collaborative place and that people would feel like their voices are being heard and included I don't believe that the plan
3:48:26
that's out there right now is the final plan I don't think it will be the final plan I expect that things will be addressed um and I certainly expect that
3:48:33
this Council if some of those changes are significant would be supportive of providing additional funding for those changes so that's my position on it I
3:48:40
tend to agree with some of my fellow counselors around the timing um as well you know we put it in this
3:48:47
package because we believe this package is the one thing we're going to have to ask for other than a new high school
3:48:52
until we start seeing that new growth be enough so that's where I'm at thank you thank
3:48:59
you all right thanks Danielle next question uh name and address for the record you have one minute to ask one
3:49:06
question hi I'm Michael vonc 44 piter Avenue uh tonight's question session is
3:49:12
emblematic of a really painful division with in the community over how to handle medford's problems and my question for
3:49:19
the council is what is it that we can do to help heal that division speaking for
3:49:24
myself like everyone I know personally all my friends and family are strong supporters of these overrides like we
3:49:30
really believe like I really believe in in this as an investment in medford's future but I see a lot of folks u in
3:49:36
this room are are really uh frustrated and angry and concerned about the overrides so there's sort of two menford
3:49:44
um kind of opposed to each other here and I know we can't all get along all the time but uh it it feels like these
3:49:51
two groups are so disconnected is there anything we can do to help bring these two groups closer together I'll go to
3:49:57
vice president Collins two minutes thank you appreciate the question obviously I'm going to give
3:50:03
a highly subjective answer because this isn't really a policy question um you know obviously I'm really saddened to
3:50:11
see well let me start here I really understand why people are so concerned
3:50:18
about these questions from both sides I see people saying wow my bills are going to go up that's really serious and I
3:50:24
need to understand why that's being proposed I can also see people saying wow this seems these things that these
3:50:30
questions would pay for are really dire we really need to make sure that these pass and I think people know which Camp I'm firmly in
3:50:38
um what I what does sadden me is seeing these two viewpoints which I think are
3:50:44
two positions that we can converse from we can have discussions from those two polls um and and not experience Division
3:50:52
and not experience a crass in our community to me I think that we start seeing division in our community when
3:50:58
certain people start saying those people who disagree with you they are against you or they are against them or this is
3:51:05
pitting X against Y and convince people of that
3:51:12
um I don't think that helpful I don't think that that is where we are to be totally honest with you I know that
3:51:18
there's a lot of people who are deeply concerned and have had conversations that haven't been productive or have
3:51:25
been offensive but I actually do not believe at all that this community is divided over these questions and I also
3:51:31
just think it's worth noting that at the end of the day um we can have conversations and sometimes those conversations un Pleasant and sometimes
3:51:37
those conversations unfortunately are hostile um but I just fundamentally for ever since we put these on the ballot in
3:51:43
June I really confused why we are fighting about this because at the end of the day these questions will be
3:51:49
decided in November when we count up the number of people that voted yes and the number of people that voted no and I
3:51:55
think the people that are saying this is dividing you they want you to feel divided and
3:52:00
I'd say look at the motivations there thank you thank you councelor cahan two
3:52:07
minutes I love that question thank you so much for bringing it up um I I think there are a few basic um um I don't want
3:52:15
to say Rules of Engagement but um just pieces of advice that people hopefully
3:52:21
understand as like good for group dynamics healthy for a community healthy for a group um I hope that people in
3:52:28
their conversations with neighbors can think about these things I hope that we on the council can also do these things
3:52:33
as well um they are things like treat other people with respect um and dignity
3:52:40
uh assume good intent right don't assume that the person you know means you ill
3:52:47
um just assume that they have good intent um listen to what folks are
3:52:52
actually saying um don't use accusational language uh you know basic
3:52:59
decorum basic um showing respect for other people is what I encourage for
3:53:05
everyone in all their discussions with friends family neighbors City councilors and all of those folks um and I I hope
3:53:12
that uh if I if I am not following that uh people will call me out um because I
3:53:18
I do hope that I can always treat everyone no matter what their political uh position on a topic is with respect
3:53:27
thank you thank you uh anyone else sure counc scell two minutes thank you and I
3:53:33
appreciate the question because I too have a stance on this and it's difficult
3:53:39
when your kids are reading posts and saying Hey Dad why are they using you for for
3:53:45
supporting constituents and residents that feel like they're being not listened to to racist or a member of KKK
3:53:53
it's it's pretty it's pretty sad right so when you see these situations
3:53:58
division it's because people feel they haven't been heard and I welcome you to look at the
3:54:04
videos from our meetings I had viable questions in our meetings and this is where the division
3:54:09
started when you try to bring these questions forward and this Council actively shut you down
3:54:15
as a member of this community and a city councel to be disrespected like that
3:54:21
opened up so many people's eyes to say is this something that's been is it
3:54:26
needed because there's a group of people my friend that aren't being hurt they're
3:54:31
afraid that no one's listening to them something that could be corrected I've said this a thousand times I never
3:54:37
said I didn't want to debt exclusion or the side even the all method group saying that they didn't want a debt exclusion all they're saying is let's
3:54:44
have a more open and transparent process you've heard so many questionable issues tonight from the firefighters designs to
3:54:51
questions seven and eight there's so many so I think the problem right now is you have six councils that really look
3:54:56
at something in an issue and they band together but they leave a whole demographic out they can say the fluffy
3:55:04
words to say that well it's divisive they're saying it's device words that some people use a divisive the bottom
3:55:09
line is if it smell if it if it quacks like a duck and Walks Like A Duck it's a duck and people just watch and see it I
3:55:16
don't want division either there's too much division in this whole country in this whole world I would love for us to
3:55:22
sit together but as a counselor when you're trying to share an opinion for a group of constituents feel that not be
3:55:28
listen to sorry thank you that they feel like they're not being listened to then you bring that forward and then they
3:55:35
they actively shut you down they use Council rules against you they suspend Council rules so you can't speak that's
3:55:42
what happened and this is why the division started because people didn't feel like they were proper to listen to
3:55:49
they didn't feel like this financial task force was actually transparent and open because if they were and the mayor
3:55:55
presented all the facts maybe we'd be in a different place right now but we're not so we made a lot of mistakes on many
3:56:02
sides thank you councelor thank you anyone else here councelor Levy two minutes so I'm gonna I'm gonna try to
3:56:10
give a more of a personal perspective of that you know I I it it's a it's a good
3:56:15
question one that hasn't been directly addressed in these Chambers too much I think honestly what we what we are
3:56:21
seeing here is a bit of a generational divide so previous I think that previous
3:56:28
generations of politicians quite literally came from a a different part of town and I've I've literally analyzed
3:56:36
this myself I put up a blog post about it and so there's a lot of people in the city who are used to having this
3:56:42
personal relationship with their elected officials because they're literally the people that they grew up with but over
3:56:50
time the demographics of Medford have shifted um you know PE you you have a
3:56:56
much younger generation of Voters a lot more people moving in and so there's a
3:57:03
and so most I mean most of the city councilors these days live in just a literally completely different
3:57:08
geographical part of Medford um and so I've I've spoken to you know there there's been a lot of angry meetings and
3:57:15
uh there is like some folks who've come up and said you know very um unpleasant
3:57:20
things to me who I've later had very good one-on-one conversations with and they've said well Matt people are scared
3:57:27
and I I do I do think that in some cases that is uh that that is the case um
3:57:35
because they feel like they don't really know like at a personal level some of
3:57:40
the folks uh here just because we do come like we are like literally living
3:57:46
in a different part of town um so I think that I think that these sorts of things will heal um will heal over time
3:57:54
um I think it's a matter of I'm trying to figure out like who uh that comes to
3:57:59
these meetings is willing to have a nice one-on-one conversation develop those relationships not everybody is but some
3:58:05
people are so it will heal with time is my take on that thank you councelor Ling all right I'm going to go really
3:58:13
quickly here um I think there's some questions around division uh we are at an inflection
3:58:21
point as a community the community is changing uh we're looking at new growth and development for the first time
3:58:27
really seriously we're talking about Decades of deferred maintenance and underinvestment that are coming up now
3:58:33
that we need to address um and I understand that paying more is a hard
3:58:38
choice I think it's a hard choice for everyone I think some people feel that it's a choice that they can make some
3:58:43
people feel like it's a choice that they can't make um but we have difficult
3:58:48
decisions and and one of those difficult decisions is to ask people to pay for
3:58:54
the things that the city needs to do um it's a very difficult decision frame we've talked about all the different
3:59:00
things that the city needs to pay for um I firmly believe in my Approach has been the best thing we can do is ask the
3:59:06
questions present the information get the budget out there and then ask the voters um to either elect people to make
3:59:14
choices which is most of the decisions or even to make them Choice themselves which is what we're talking about with this proposition with questions 67 and
3:59:22
eight um one thing I'll say is I don't call opposition talking points fear
3:59:27
tactics I don't do that um I don't say the opposition is dividing the city
3:59:34
that's just something I don't do when counselor scarpelli talks about the meetings that uh we should all look at
3:59:40
to see what's happened I'm pointing to people to those exact same meetings to watch watch those exact same meetings because I think if they watch them
3:59:46
they'll see things from the perspective that I experience those meetings from right um at the end of the day we're not
3:59:52
perfect um sometimes things get divisive sometimes certainly I react here or when
3:59:58
I sat down there in a way that I'm not happy about that's a little more divisive or a little more pointed than I
4:00:03
wanted it to be um and I try to do better every time I try to learn from those issues and I think at the end of
4:00:10
the day there will always be outstanding questions there will always be a process
4:00:16
that could have been longer that could have been better that the rules could have been looked at differently that people could have had more time and I
4:00:22
think you have to balance that against the priorities in the time that we need to make a choice right we could have a
4:00:28
process for 10 years um and there's still be people with outstanding questions who aren't happy with the end of the process and at
4:00:35
the end of the day I think that's what democracy is about this is been a 4-Hour discussion of major tensions that people
4:00:41
have answering questions trying to get to a point of agreement and stay in respectful dialogue and I think that's
4:00:47
the best that we can do um and at the end of the day the voters will decide the voters will decide on November 5th
4:00:53
if these questions are approved or denied the voters will decide next November who serves on this Council who
4:00:58
serves as the mayor who serves as a school committee um and that's democracy we aren't all going to agree with it
4:01:04
I've been on the losing end of quite a few votes in this room myself so thank you
4:01:14
Marian thook 29 Garfield Avenue I was trying to get your attention um when the
4:01:21
assessor was here because I'm not sure if you can answer me um I had gone to him before because he was saying that
4:01:29
the average house uh taxes go up $195 a year I believe and I had gone to
4:01:37
him because my house bill my tax bill has been going up $850 a year
4:01:44
I when I went to him about that uh he told me he didn't know why I was complaining because it wasn't the first
4:01:50
year that my house had gone up $850 uh so what was the problem and um I
4:01:58
told him well I guess because it's been more than one year in a row that my house has been going up $850 a year my
4:02:08
home insurance went from 2,000 to 4,000 and uh the only he told me the
4:02:14
only thing that I would qualify for for an exemption as a senior is the CPA
4:02:20
except myself and many other seniors can't qualify for the CPA because we've
4:02:26
been advised that you know at our age that we should put our homes in a trust so that our children won't have to pay
4:02:32
uh inheritance tax when we die and in the CPA it says if your home is in a
4:02:38
trust you not qualify for the exemption for the CPA so
4:02:45
um Medford is the only surrounding City that does not have a residential exemption so we don't have that and
4:02:52
there are no exemptions unlike another senior that spoke I do not have a
4:02:57
pension my husband passed and I just get Social Security so I was wondering how
4:03:03
we come up with this statement of getting only 40 when
4:03:09
the average homeowners is supposed to be5 when minus
4:03:15
850 um we've gone over a little bit on the question I think the question is
4:03:21
about why the property value is going up faster than the median or the average that the the assessor presented the
4:03:27
assessor presented that just for this year the estimated median single family tax bill would increase 195 year on year
4:03:33
so that's I'm looking at the slide he presented it was just for this change from fiscal 24 to fiscal
4:03:40
25 um I think quite frankly a lot of those questions we'd have to talk to the assessor I'd be happy to try to set up a
4:03:46
meeting with the three of us or the two of us if you don't want me involved no that's fine that would make it clear to
4:03:51
me because he told me uh that he really didn't want to talk to me because he's tired of talking to seniors oh that
4:03:58
would surprise me but well he was yeah he said he was just tired of talking to seni that surprises because you know he
4:04:05
said that uh you know you don't two and a half does not mean you pay two and a half somebody else might pay two and a
4:04:11
half you apparently pay a lot more because houses in your neighborhood go for a lot uh I questioned the items on
4:04:19
my house it said I had a modern kitchen and I said well my house has my I said
4:04:25
my house is in disrepair and my kitchen has not been updated since the 60s and
4:04:30
he said do you have electricity in your kitchen and I said well yes and he said
4:04:37
anything past 1920 which means you have electricity is a modern kitchen that's what you're
4:04:44
being taxed on a modern kitchen I I can't speak to what the state laws are around assessment um and how they come
4:04:50
up with their formulas but I'd be happy to try to sub a meeting we've gone extensively over on the question I do
4:04:56
want to give other counselors a chance if any other counselors want two minutes great anyone have
4:05:03
any Council vice president CS not I just EO what president bear said I think that
4:05:09
these are questions that you know and we' be happy to lia's Council leadership to set this with the chief assessor I
4:05:14
think that he'd be able to give you much better information than we can on the council that's why I'm afraid of voting
4:05:20
for this because I say uh these expenses are going so high I can't fix the
4:05:25
repairs in my house so I'm afraid I can't pay this
4:05:30
thank you I will coordinate get a contact information we can try to set up a meeting around the specific questions I appreciate that thank you thank
4:05:38
you just realizing I would have asked Larry to do it so another sad thought um
4:05:45
anyone else on this question see none go to the podium to former Chief one minute
4:05:50
for one question how you doing John Friedman my question to the council is
4:05:57
how do you hand how do you ask the voters to vote for $30 million and give that to the architect
4:06:03
that hasn't demonstrated that he has the ability to solve some of these difficult
4:06:11
problems so and I'll I'll list them um the first one is and and it has to do
4:06:17
with the design I know you're not responsible for design but the number one killer of firefighters in the United
4:06:23
States today is cancer that means the design has to be centered around a thing
4:06:30
called clean Zone design okay so they've had multiple I've seen when I was Chief
4:06:37
multiple different Renditions of the design as it progressed when I was working on it with the architect when I
4:06:43
like it's like that got thrown in the trash and now there's completely new three or
4:06:48
four different new designs okay and the last one that I see um it definitely
4:06:55
does not address the cancer issue they stuck it they they created what I call a Decon closet okay no way to get in there
4:07:04
and out of there without going through the Hut Zone okay so there's about 10
4:07:09
other problems that I see with the design I'm not going to list them all here but how do you hand them $30
4:07:15
million and say okay you've had all this time to fix the design to make it
4:07:21
correct okay and it still isn't there so
4:07:27
the the union is simply asking to be involved to have the ability to meet
4:07:33
with the architect and and help solve some of these issues they they don't everybody wants a new headquarters they
4:07:40
want a new headquarters the city wants a new head the taxpayers want a new headquarters so why would the
4:07:47
firefighters not want it and it's because we're looking at all these problems and we're not seeing a solution
4:07:53
and then when we ask to have a seat at the table it's not being given to them
4:07:59
in a meaningful way that they can invoke change the other last thing I'll leave you with the design is so important
4:08:05
because the square footage relates to the price so they put a price on it in
4:08:11
the beginning based on the square footage that's where the 30,000 uh squ foot facility related to
4:08:18
30 million but there's other hidden costs there's costs for when we tear
4:08:24
down headquarters we have to go somewhere that's a huge cost all the equipment has to be moved the extractors
4:08:30
the um the SCBA Filling Station all that stuff has to be recreated for us to run
4:08:36
out of somewhere else okay that's a huge cost and then obviously there's other
4:08:42
costs when you go to move back into the new station you got to buy furniture You Gotta Buy Equipment all those things I
4:08:47
was just talking they don't take the old stuff and move it they buy new so the 30 million could balloon up to 45
4:08:56
if if if it's done the way it's supposed to be if the square footage is made so that you can have room for expansion so
4:09:03
that as the department grows because the building is supposed to last 50 years right now it's it it's like everything
4:09:09
is jammed into a little small area on the apparatus Bay and I don't see clean Zone design in there so my question to
4:09:17
the council and to the taxpayers is how do you vote for something that ahead of
4:09:23
time beforehand when you don't even know what the actual cost is going to be I've seen no itemized budget that says okay
4:09:31
we're going to spend this much on the building this much on chiefy moving people okay I'll stop right there I just
4:09:37
I could not in good conscience leave here tonight without putting out some facts thank you I appreciate that want
4:09:44
to go counc scell if I can first Chief we didn't have an opportunity that when you left no one
4:09:50
could say this publicly but we want to thank you because we know how difficult your job is anyway we understand
4:09:56
becoming a chief is very difficult because you then thrown into the realm of politics and that's that's sad
4:10:02
because I know who you are as a man and I know how much you love being a fight fighter so I'll be honest with you I was
4:10:07
sad to hear that you did step away because Medford is worse as a fire department because because you're gone
4:10:13
so I want to make sure publicly somebody said that to you and I know D Danielle doesn't want to say it but I've heard it
4:10:20
over and over again through public through social media our leader of the community Through social media bashing
4:10:26
on you bashing on other fire fire chiefs saying it's all them that they've been part of the design so I need to know
4:10:35
when you left were our firefighters involved in that design that went out that we have
4:10:41
today okay I'm going to need a little time to answer that please because it's a complicated question because when I
4:10:47
took over and we started working on headquarters design the architect um asked for our help for the
4:10:53
firefighters help and myself we created program books and I created a headquarters um I won't call it a tax
4:11:01
force was a committee where I I gave out the program books to my team and because
4:11:06
you're always smarter and stronger as a team I've learned that in the fire service in 30 years right even though
4:11:12
I'm a pretty smart guy I I they're the ones that are going to basically you know work there for the next 30 Years
4:11:19
and live there so they input is very valuable and I put a huge amount of um
4:11:26
stock in that okay so once we got the we had one meeting we filled out the
4:11:31
program books gave it to the architect and then what happened after that and I'm not sure because I've only been
4:11:37
involved in one headquarters the the process but at a certain point uh it was
4:11:43
taken up above my team and then the Architects and myself tweaked it now
4:11:49
this is going back to my design which I don't see in those designs my Design's gone so when I look at the new designs
4:11:55
it doesn't even come close to what I had on paper okay with with the architect
4:12:01
then at a certain point it got taken up above myself and it was gone for a little while and that may be normal in
4:12:08
the process I don't know and but I kept asking hey when sometimes they would
4:12:13
have a meeting and they'd show me something and I'd say hey can I share this with my team hold off on that don't share it
4:12:20
okay so they weren't involved as it went through the different phases then it got
4:12:26
to the point where okay um we had to make some really hard choices because
4:12:31
they were setting limits on the amount of square footage which relates to money I understand that so we tried use an
4:12:39
efficiency to try and make the design more efficient which is healthy when you design you're supposed to try and you
4:12:45
know think outside the box make things more efficient but it got to a point where
4:12:50
it's like okay it can't be any bigger than this and we could not even with the efficiency get everything in there okay
4:12:58
and I was unable to share that with my team okay I was told not to all right so
4:13:05
justifiably so they're questioning me all the time hey chief what's going on what's going on then at some point in
4:13:10
the process they were pulled into a meeting with with the chief of staff shown the design and they came to my
4:13:16
office very angry because it's the first time they saw it and it didn't meet their needs okay and I was like where
4:13:24
did you see that they told me okay so you know they felt and I agree with them
4:13:31
that they weren't involved in the changes that were made so you know and
4:13:36
then there was things that they noticed again as a team you're stronger that I didn't notice privacy issues the size of
4:13:43
bedrooms all sorts of issues that um quite frankly were you know would have
4:13:49
would have been healthy if they were involved in the process they would have got sort of ironed out at that time so
4:13:55
they are correct and they feel jaded that they weren't involved in that process all right so I'm setting the
4:14:02
record straight there after I left I can't okay tell you what happened after that but at that point you know
4:14:09
headquarters was at a certain point and we were sort of at a like Crossroads it's like okay we need to
4:14:15
make the reason I'm saying the design because it changes the square footage which changes the amount of money so how
4:14:20
do you the Design's not finalized yet they're asking for a fixed amount of money right and what happens if you know
4:14:27
we do fix it and it ends up being bigger which means could be another 15 million
4:14:33
I don't know you know and and for example the apparatus Bays the original
4:14:39
design I had five Bays right other cities and towns have six now headquarters is the uh you know it's
4:14:47
where everybody comes to do all the outside stations come there after every fire you have all your apparatus that
4:14:53
respond there this design is's nowhere for them to park where do they Park when they come to headquarters where do they
4:14:58
Park when they come to train there's a classroom in there all the trucks have to come down because you have to respond
4:15:04
from headquarters if there's a fire so I'm looking at the design I'm saying okay where does everybody Park then I
4:15:11
look at the ramp and I'm saying I don't see the turn radiuses on there I'm looking at that ramp I don't think lat one can get out of there the way that
4:15:18
design is right now if you put the turn radiuses on there how do they come how do they take a left and go up mytic out
4:15:24
with that current ramp okay so th those are all things that can be fixed they
4:15:30
can be fixed but they relate to more money so how do you vote for this with a
4:15:38
fixed dollar amount that's all I'm saying so thank you Chief again if I can Council president got a minute George
4:15:44
minute thank you clarification thank you with that I also know that from what I've heard it's a th000 square F feet
4:15:50
smaller I think you want to talk about Unity you want to talk about doing something correct as a team when you're
4:15:57
talking about firefighters that their safety with carcinogens aren't being met
4:16:02
I think in unity we should all say that we do not support this debt exclusion for a fire station that's inadequate for
4:16:08
our men and women in the fire station that's what I think we should say you want to start in that process that would
4:16:14
be great but Chief thank you so much for the clarity and I apologize that our firefighters aren't being heard and
4:16:21
again this is the issue when the mayor does things in bubbles and she tries to make things without my hope my hope
4:16:27
coming here tonight and speaking tonight that it'll force them to the table and and allow us to help them allow us to
4:16:34
help them fix it and then have an accurate number that they can go back before November so that the people can
4:16:42
actually see that it was solved then they can we can all get behind it the union will get behind it I'm not dead
4:16:48
I'm still here right anytime they want my help all right I live in the city I'm very passionate about headquarters I'd
4:16:54
love to see it built but I want it built right thank you thank you Chief I'll just speak for myself to say um I
4:17:02
appreciate a your service to the city coming down here tonight laying out this case a lot of what you've talked about
4:17:08
has been coming out drips and drabs over the past couple months um
4:17:13
to me to an extent as best as I can say it
4:17:18
I think we are conflating two pieces of a question there's the question of the design and the design process from
4:17:24
everything I've heard it's not adequate we're not at a final design that final design needs to be improved 100% as I've
4:17:31
read through letter from Danielle things online things like the clean zones and
4:17:37
the space and the especially I know I've had some conversations with Todd Blake and the interim Chief around how the
4:17:43
design was changed relative to the massot mystica Main Street project and how that's impacted things like turn
4:17:49
radius in the apparatus base I have a lot of significant concerns about that I still believe a debt exclusion is the
4:17:56
best way to fund the fire station headquarters now if 30 million is only funding 75 85 95% of that a it's not
4:18:05
just 30 million it's 30 million plus inflationary adjustments and minor project changes so that 30 million Bond
4:18:12
could really be 2 to 35 if the changes can be made within that then this debt exclusion continues to pay for the fire
4:18:18
station headquarters if it's more than that you've said a number 40 45 million you think potentially I'm 100% in to say
4:18:26
we need to look at the bar capacity or we need to ask again for more I don't think that voting no on this debt
4:18:33
exclusion will get us to eventually a yes that's my position on it I think
4:18:38
voting yes to the financing me I'm not asking to vote no what I'm asking for I hear you it's a seat at the table for
4:18:44
them so that they can get what they need before November it's not that difficult sit down with the architect give them
4:18:51
access you know let the chief be involved I'm not Chief anymore let the chief be involved with them and and I
4:18:56
didn't mean to put words in your mouth that you're advocating for that I'm my personal position is voting yes funds
4:19:02
most of this project the way that I think it can best be funded the fastest way it can be funded I didn't have all
4:19:08
this information when we released the plan do I wish that people had acted differently so it would be easier to
4:19:14
talk to the residents and get them to support things like this 100%
4:19:19
um as you're aware as other folks here are aware there are things that are not within this council's control within my
4:19:27
control on balance thing you mentioned was Mast doart like yeah shouldn't Mast
4:19:33
doart shouldn't the headquarters be granted an exception where they take
4:19:39
precedent over that like Mass thought should be changing their design not headquarters changing their design for
4:19:45
Mast should go the other way around you're on a very tight site that that site that we have it's very tight it's
4:19:52
the only site we have so we have nowhere else to go it's very tight and they're gonna have to try and give them some I
4:19:58
don't know if they're called variances or what they are to allow headquarters to function properly right that's that's
4:20:03
what I'm seeing is not happening it seems like no communication yeah I think we I personally agree that the
4:20:10
communication needs to be better it needs to be more of a seat at the table I'm still going to vote the way I'm and a vote because I think it gets us a lot
4:20:16
of the way there on the financing question even if I personally have a lot of problems and issues with the design and the design process as it stands so
4:20:22
that's just where I'm at understood um and I appreciate you coming down and yeah I think the other thing we've
4:20:27
talked about a lot tonight is that the state is not doing us right in a lot of ways that includes Mast out and DCR on
4:20:32
our streets and roads in general and you know they get to say well we're not going to spend the Six Million to
4:20:38
redesign your intersection if you don't do it our way and we don't really have a lot of recourse even though I wish we did so it's tough situation well we
4:20:48
could work with them I'm sure there's a solution if we met with them and the architect there's got to be some sort of
4:20:54
happy medium where yeah they get what they want and we get some means of getting I use l one because L one's 58
4:21:01
feet long yep so if you ramp at 60 yeah you barely make it out of the building
4:21:07
you can't turn until you're completely out of the building so what happens is you got a tiny ramp there they're GNA have to start turning then you hit the
4:21:14
building you're setting them up for failure yeah so there's ways of doing it and I'm sure Mast art would see that if
4:21:20
we showed it to them it sounds like a lot of heads need to get together before a final design
4:21:25
happens okay anything else on this question all right I think we are thank
4:21:31
you Chief um we have someone who hasn't asked a question yet and then we have a hand
4:21:37
that has and someone in line that has so we'll go to the floor name and address for the record one minute to answer one
4:21:44
question or ask one question is this on it's on you're good Y and you shouldn't need to touch um my
4:21:51
name is Jennifer Yano and I live at 16 Monument Street and uh I just wanted to
4:21:57
thank all of you counselors for taking all this time and providing all this information to us because you know these
4:22:04
are Big questions I am very much in support of them um I'll reveal um but
4:22:13
all this information has been really helpful as I think about it I do have a question um and that has to do with the
4:22:19
establishment eventually at some point of a residential exemption is that
4:22:24
something that I mean I don't know how that would happen I mean obviously it's probably not going to happen before
4:22:31
November 5th but is that something that that is within the council's perview or
4:22:38
is that the mayor or some other um body that would make that decision I
4:22:46
think it might address a lot of the fears and concerns that residents do have um people who are on fixed incomes
4:22:53
and so on I can answer does anyone else want to go first on this question I know
4:22:58
councelor scarpelli and I have been in five tax setting meetings together I don't know if you want to all right um
4:23:05
residential exemption it's not the Panacea it seems to be a um there is a break even point
4:23:13
in the home valuations where if you implement a residential exemption if your value is above that you actually
4:23:19
start paying more so if we implemented a residential exemption I believe two years ago that break even was almost
4:23:25
exactly the average around 768 th000 if you're above that value you actually
4:23:31
start paying more than you did without the exemption if you're under that value you pay less now the reason this happens
4:23:37
is essentially uh this to do this a the council would set it but it would be in
4:23:43
partnership with the assessor's office the assessor's office has said they probably need to hire two more full-time staff in that office just to process the
4:23:49
applications every year um but essentially you take what is the flat
4:23:55
tax rate uh across all residential year 8.51 per thousand I think is our FY 24
4:24:02
rate and you create a 30% exemption on the tax of the average home so 30% of
4:24:10
the tax bill for 768 ,000 home that becomes your exemption that's a fixed dollar amount let's say for just for
4:24:18
efficiency sake let's say that's $3,000 so if your tax bill is uh you
4:24:24
know $6,000 you get $33,000 off um but
4:24:29
that has to be shifted right so the city's actual tax doesn't come down the city still needs to raise all the
4:24:34
revenue it's raising every year so that that fixed dollar am actually also means
4:24:40
that you increase the tax rate so instead of having a an 8.51% rate you
4:24:45
might have a 12.5% rate but then you get the $3,000 off if your owner occupied so
4:24:52
if you're getting a 30% rate increase and you're getting a 30% exemption if you're in a lower value home you save
4:24:59
money if you're in a condo you probably save money or if you're in an under low value single family you save money if
4:25:04
you're in a multif family a high value single family certainly if you're in a large apartment building you're actually
4:25:10
paying more because the tax rates going up signific ific anly to cover for that shift um so essentially it benefits some
4:25:18
people in the community it benefits people who generally condo owners people in single families below the break even
4:25:23
point and it uh actually would result in increased taxes for people who have very
4:25:29
high valued single family homes most multif family homes are over 750,000
4:25:34
valuation apartment buildings are so um we could implement it uh we would need
4:25:39
six months to a year to do so uh before for a tax rate hearing which happens in December so we'd probably need to make a
4:25:45
decision by April or May of the prior year the assessor's office would then need to be budgeted to hire more staff
4:25:51
to process the applications and at the end of the day um it doesn't it's not a
4:25:56
Panacea for everyone I tend to support it anyway I think it turns a flat rate wealth tax into a progressive rate
4:26:03
wealth tax where the rate is actually lower on Lower wealth properties and higher on higher wealth properties um
4:26:10
but it doesn't help everyone it doesn't mean if you're a senior and you're above the break even you might pay more um so
4:26:17
it's not it doesn't is something that could be considered it certainly is we discussed we consider it and discuss it
4:26:23
every December we basically have the conversation I just tried to summarize um at our tax rate setting
4:26:29
hearings and I know there's been different perspectives on it I've been a supporter because I generally tend to think that having that Progressive rate
4:26:35
system is is a better approach than the flat rate um but similarly I've heard arguments from my colleagues councelor
4:26:41
carello councelor Knight who have are not on the council but they were concerned about what if you're in a home
4:26:47
value above the break even point and that's about basically about half of people who are owning properties so I
4:26:53
think it goes either way okay thank you thanks and thanks again to all of you
4:27:00
thank you any other stuff on the residential exemption all right uh can you wait can
4:27:07
you wait all right uh we're we are now I
4:27:14
think no one who has anyone who has hold on one second Andy I'll make a brief though just one second yes sir is anyone
4:27:20
not asked a question who wants to answer ask a question seeing none will'll go to
4:27:25
public comment I'll take Andy then I'll take gastone for a second question then we have Micah on Zoom M casetti while
4:27:32
the information is hot she's the first person that brought this owner occupi
4:27:37
residential exemption up at this Podium and as you don't know
4:27:42
I I've been here at least 16 years in succession every December to ask for it
4:27:48
and every single time it was it was knocked down um basically it's called
4:27:53
Mass General law if you want to look it up chapter 40b section
4:27:59
5C and at the maximum it would be 30% shift of
4:28:04
residential values and then as you said counselor it would they come out to be a
4:28:11
figure as a cut off value anything below would receive discounts in real dollars
4:28:17
and above would go up um 30% is the
4:28:23
maximum and sville does that and the average sumerville resident that
4:28:28
is appliable for is saving over $3,000 real cash so it's more than half
4:28:35
of their uh bills some of these people so anyways way I understand the law is
4:28:40
with my sixth grade education I read it once 16 years ago that the mayor has to
4:28:47
ask and approve for it and the majority of the city council if that is done and
4:28:53
sent to the State House you get it right away thank you Andy gastone uh either question or
4:29:01
comment and I'm going to go up to two minutes for everybody for this last little section thank you Mr President
4:29:07
gon Fe 61 stingy Road I just uh wanted to readdress something that I've already
4:29:12
addressed but I heard it here again today several times actually and it's
4:29:17
the the myth or maybe to use a term that invoke this days the misinformation that uh proposition
4:29:24
proposition two and a half does not allow a city to increase Revenue um at a
4:29:29
pace that is fast enough to account for inflation so I have the numbers here well first of all let me say like
4:29:34
procision 2 have excludes four cases from the limitation tax lb increases and
4:29:40
one such case is new grow growth so in fiscal year 25 the amount of property taxes collected from New Growth is
4:29:47
estimated to be 2.5 million actually I have the the new number that the assessor gave earlier today that's a
4:29:53
fiscal year 25 New Growth 2.52 five million so that's more towards on my side actually um so together with the
4:30:01
stat statutory 2.5% increase meaning like the limitation uh that the city can
4:30:07
increase up to the total uh fiscal year 2025 property tax revenue increase is
4:30:13
approximately 4.3% compared to fiscal year 2024 so uh the August uh PC which again
4:30:21
is the feds uh the Federal Reserves preferred measure of inflation was 2.2% on an annual basis um hence metfor is
4:30:30
incre increasing property tax revenue in 2025 in fiscal year 2025 by over 2%
4:30:36
above inflation so we are we are running above inflation uh by
4:30:43
2.1% um so it is misinformation that proposition two and a half uh does not
4:30:49
allow met for to increase its Revenue uh faster than 2.5% it just re it just
4:30:56
depends on New Growth and I'm very happy to hear about the zoning changes uh to
4:31:02
stimulate growth and everything the city can do because as I always say it should be relentless forward progress to
4:31:10
increase economic growth in this city and then if you do that you're going to be able to fly much higher than the
4:31:17
inflation rate thank you very much thank you guest Stone
4:31:22
um anyone else on that
4:31:28
comment I just want to note myself and this is just me being economics St I'm really sorry to do this at 10
4:31:34
pm I love I like to use the pce uh price deflator for state and local government
4:31:40
it's it's it's 24 on the uh Bea table of the GDP price deflators and if you look
4:31:46
at that it tells a little bit of a different story even when pce for like the average person was 4% for example in
4:31:52
2021 for state and local government it was 6.7 in 2021 it was uh 7.1 2022 for
4:32:01
PC generally it's 8.0 for state and local state and local price inflators tend to be higher than the PC it's PC
4:32:09
but it's just PC broken down for state and local tends to be higher um I appreciate your comment I agree that the
4:32:16
new growth element is a factor here right and I think Matt was saying over the last since 1980 or can't remember
4:32:22
the fact it's not 2.5% that we've averaged it's 3.1 or something like that because of the new growth in the last
4:32:27
couple years the new growth is significantly higher so I think we're at like four um but we're also talking about 4% when we're looking at a cost
4:32:35
increase of eight right so it's still running behind so yeah so if you're you
4:32:40
see in 2021 or 2022 they die I'm sure that we didn't yeah we weren't above inflation but you we catching up we're
4:32:46
flying again as I said we're running 2% above maybe we some someone put out a great chart where it was showing the the
4:32:53
real uh nominal dollar increase and then it also had a graph of the inflation adjusted real dollar increase and I
4:33:00
think personally we're catching up for 2020 to 2023 here with this override okay so so but I just want to clarify
4:33:08
that if we keep with new growth we're going to be able to definitely account for what we lost May in 2021 2022 and
4:33:16
and to me and now we're going back and forth and this is just because I we're already gotting up I enjoy this I mean I think we're catch I think this override
4:33:22
catches up to where we need to be where the new growth it it fits to me what I'm seeing as this is the one time we're
4:33:28
going to have to ask for this outside of the high school because the new growth will get us there in five to 10 years
4:33:33
and this get catches us up from the inflation adjustments that we need over the past few years so thanks
4:33:42
I like arguing about PC with people um we'll go to zoom and then we'll go to
4:33:48
the podium Zoom I have Micah name and address second question you have two minutes if you want to ask a question
4:33:54
make a comment sure yeah uh Micah kesselman 499 in Main Street I this is
4:33:59
probably a good time to actually sort of bring this question back up again because I don't think it was really fully answered um but maybe I didn't
4:34:05
praise it um helpfully before um we've heard a lot of good reasons why we
4:34:12
should vote for uh the override and uh
4:34:18
try and catch up our woefully under budgeted municipality is something that
4:34:23
it makes more sense um but what I wanted to get at
4:34:28
before and what I want to understand and I would and really I guess this is a question for coun
4:34:34
Capelli can you articulate an actual actionable alternative plan to catch our
4:34:41
budget up to where it needs to be because as far as I can tell there is no
4:34:47
alternative I don't care about transparency I mean I do but that's not what the question's about I'm not I
4:34:52
don't want to I don't need to hear about divisiveness transparency or anything that I actually want to hear just is there an articulable alternative that we
4:35:00
could pursue that is actionable and realistic and Free Money free cash
4:35:06
frankly is not an answer because that free cash is a one-time Band-Aid that's not Dependable not sustainable so what's
4:35:15
the alternative to the override thank you so if I can thank you coun so very
4:35:22
simply put is is I've been saying this for months now is that it's a one-time
4:35:27
correction with the free cash to eliminate any fear and uh disruption to our whole
4:35:35
Community I've been saying for years in that in the last five years we've had
4:35:40
zero new growth grow when you talk about New Growth that is the solution the solution to any community's
4:35:49
um investment in finances is their new growth we've done nothing in the City of
4:35:54
Medford to hang our hats on other than a beer hall we haven't seen anything bringing
4:36:02
true funding other than a beer hall so I mean I I've been pretty
4:36:08
consistent in what I've been saying but although you don't want to look at transparency I think that's the major
4:36:15
issue right now is because the word the information is not getting out there we're voting on something that we've
4:36:21
shown so many different reasons why we shouldn't there are so many open questions there are so many people
4:36:28
actual people that are going to get hurt that to have a solution is very simple
4:36:33
that's using free cash once you keep people keep saying that I'm saying that that we do this all the time we do this
4:36:41
once because this community had over $35 million 30 over $34 million of free cash
4:36:48
that we've could have used and then sat together in an open process to see what
4:36:53
we can do together as a total Community to see what we needed we didn't do that
4:37:00
so again new growth and development is so important we look at the way that our
4:37:06
um our budget was uh under underfunded in certain aspects but underappreciated
4:37:13
I think we have to look at so many different um options in the future but what we what we lacked and
4:37:20
the reason why we here is because our mayor and our Administration used one-time
4:37:26
funding to carry her her water for the last five and a half
4:37:31
years this is why we are where we are thank you councelor
4:37:38
scarelli any further comments on that comment or question for members of the council seeing none will'll go to the
4:37:43
podium our esteemed election commissioner and former School Committee Member yeah former yeah attorney Bill
4:37:49
Kee 18 kilg R for Mass uh just wanted to follow up I know it's always difficult when uh you're putting these
4:37:55
presentations before the uh the community is that the school committee going to do this as well I don't know
4:38:02
yeah because it should be recommended that the school committee because I know a lot of the folks that talked issues
4:38:08
talked about the school committee issues and uh they they definitely need to get clarified so there's a clear
4:38:14
understanding so that everybody can understand and appreciate like I got a student up at the high school that's part of the vocational program you mean
4:38:20
I've had all my kids educated at uh the metha public schools and I'm I'm happy with the education that's provided at the school system I know there's some
4:38:27
comments about you I mean the teachers and where they stand you mean it's all on how parents are involved and what the
4:38:32
expectations is you mean every kid learns differently my other concern is uh with the mcast also being on the uh
4:38:39
on the voting block uh in nov November how much money do we dedicate to the mcast in order to basically prepare for
4:38:46
the test so there's other money that could be allocated towards whatever funding is needed to uh to maintain a
4:38:52
budget I've I was part of the whole recession back in 2010 2011 where everybody was getting laid off and
4:38:58
everybody lost their job it was the community that maintained everything you mean my time yeah you were student there
4:39:04
so you I mean you got to understand how this gets presented to everybody you're on 23 different Community channels
4:39:11
throughout Massachusetts you I mean because we're on Comcast and you're on Verizon so how you present yourself and
4:39:17
what you talk about here gets presented to leaders of Industry to people that are looking to do development to do
4:39:24
projects to to that build businesses you I mean so the decorum and how things get
4:39:30
presented you guys got to look at how that's being done and what messages is is being presented you mean just tonight
4:39:36
alone you mean the one thing I I just haven't seen is a real plan or an understanding of a plan
4:39:42
for six seven and eight and I'm sure it'll come out and it'll get concise you guys are working through it there's a
4:39:47
need to rip off the Band-Aid and figure out how money is going to get allocated and spent but it's a presentation that
4:39:53
you make not only to the community but to every else in the Commonwealth um and if I can with with your with uh your
4:39:59
situation in terms of the lead paint uh I mean uh the the the lead in the water did you get your child
4:40:06
tested I don't think we're going to go back I don't think we're going to go Direct on what people because it's always a concern you I mean I know that
4:40:13
was the biggest thing I was just at a meeting today with um um treasure
4:40:19
Goldberg and they have money it's called swirl it's an account that they put in 170 schools in order to have water
4:40:26
bubblers that are fresh water and I'm not sure if that's been allocated or looked at as a resource but she just
4:40:32
presented that today at a community meeting for for uh businesses and what she's doing with the schools so that
4:40:38
might be something you guys want to take a look at you mean my and the acronym was swirl okay you I mean and they have
4:40:44
a lot of money for that but you mean if there's lead in the water and stuff like that you I mean should probably let the
4:40:50
community and the kids know they should get tested just to make sure that they're not exposed to it but I thank you for your time thank
4:40:57
you Council vice president Collins thank you president Bears um I don't have a direct comment to that last um question
4:41:03
that was made but I really appreciate it appreciate the resources that were shared as well on the recommendations um
4:41:09
I just wanted to note it is quite a late hour and we actually have a second meeting to get to after this so I would not motion but request that we now
4:41:15
proceed to public participation and then adjourn and take up the agenda items on our regular meeting agenda on the motion
4:41:22
to adjourn the committee of the whole move to our regular meeting agenda by councelor Collins seconded by councelor S
4:41:28
leming councelor Matt saying um we have been going for a while I need a little
4:41:33
bit of a break and it will take us about 10 minutes to get the zoom going for the regular meeting um we do have a number
4:41:39
of items on so on that motion Mr cler please call or on this
4:41:45
motion all those in favor oppose motion passes